http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Challenges of Teaching English Language Classes of Slow and Fast
Learners in the United Arab Emirates Universities
Bilal Zakarneh1, Najah Al-Ramahi1 & Mahmoud Mahmoud2
1

Ajman University, UAE

2

University of Nizwa, Oman

Correspondence: Bilal Zakarneh, College of Humanities and Sciences, Ajman University, United Arab Emirates. P.O.
Box: 346, Ajman, UAE.
Received: November 15, 2019

Accepted: December 31, 2019

Online Published: February 6, 2020

doi:10.5430/ijhe.v9n1p256

URL: https://doi.org/10.5430/ijhe.v9n1p256

Abstract
One of the greatest challenges experienced by teachers teaching students who learn English as a foreign or a second
language is teaching a class consisting of fast learners and slow learners commonly referred to as mixed-ability
classes. The present study investigates challenges experienced by teachers of English language classes encompassing
slow learners and fast learners. Data was collected using survey questionnaire and analyzed using Microsoft excel.
Results revealed that teachers of English language experience several challenges: mixed-ability class tend to be
uncooperative and fast learners get bored easily; challenges in planning for the lesson to teach a mixed-ability class;
challenges in creating appropriate work-materials for the mixed-ability class; lack of best approaches to manage
mixed-ability class; challenges in getting attention of all learners in a mixed-ability class; and frustration when
teaching mixed-ability classroom due to low motivation of weak students.
Keywords: fast learners, slow learners, mixed-ability class, instructional methods
1. Introduction
It has been suggested in the extant literature that one of the greatest challenges experienced by teachers teaching
students who learn English as a foreign language is teaching a class consisting of fast learners and slow learners
commonly referred to as mixed-ability classes (Al-Shammakhi, & Al-Humaidi, 2015). According to Hedge (2000),
mixed-ability classes have students with varying abilities in learning language, and that may be the key underlying
cause of challenges experienced by teachers who teach mixed-ability classes. Emphasizing the differences in abilities
among students in mixed-ability classes, Hedge (2000) argued that students differ in their cognitive abilities and this
consequently affects their language learning abilities. Hedge (2000) identified learners as high-ability learners (fast
learners); moderate-ability learners and low-ability learners (slow learners) of foreign language. Supporting this view,
Chapman and King (2003) opined that in mixed-ability foreign language classes, students with most difficulties in
learning language tend to experience severe to moderate spelling and reading difficulties. Chapman and King (2003)
further noted that other learners without history of reading and spelling difficulties might also find it challenging to
learn foreign language. Though researchers acknowledge that teachers of mixed-ability classes experience challenges,
few have investigated these challenges within the United Arab Emirates (UAE) context. The present study seeks to
contribute to the literature in second-language learning by investigating and highlighting possible challenges teachers
of English language classes encompassing slow learners and fast learners in the UAE universities may experience
and possible solutions as indicated in the academic literature. The rest of the paper is organized as follow: research
question guiding the study; a review of literature in relation to what characterizes mixed-ability classes; research
methodology detailing how the study was conducted; research findings based on the participants’ responses, and a
discussion of the findings; and a conclusion and recommendations to teachers of mixed-ability foreign language
classes.
2. Research Questions
This study addresses the following questions related to learning of foreign language:
1.

What are the characteristics of mixed-ability classes?

2.

What are the characteristics of slow and weak leaners, and fast and bright learners?

Published by Sciedu Press

256

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

3.

What are the challenges experienced by English teachers of mixed-ability classes?

4.

What are the instructional methods that can benefit learners of English with mixed abilities learning in
mixed-ability classes?

3. Literature Review
Mixed-ability classes consist of fast learners and slow or weak learners (Ansari, 2013). According to Ansari (2013),
learners in mixed-ability classes have different levels of learning and achievements. These learners differ in
weaknesses and strengths. These students differ in their abilities, including in fluency and accuracy, grammatical
knowledge, productive and receptive skills and the size of vocabulary (Valentic, 2005 Sailaja,2018).
3.1 Slow Learners of Language
Psychologists and educational researchers use different terms to describe and refer to slow learner students. For
Muppudathi (2014) a slow learner is a student who has the ability to gain all the necessary academic skills with the
exception that her/his depth and rate is below that of an average learner. In view of Borah (2013), slow learners are
students with slightly below average cognitive abilities. They may fail to excel in some subjects or classes. However,
this does not qualify them to be identified as disabled students as they are normal students who cannot study under
traditionally accepted educational system (Borah, 2013). According to Borah (2013), slow learners could be
identified with five characteristics. Firstly, these learners work very slowly and lack the ability to undertake complex
or multifaceted problems. Secondly, slow learners demonstrate poor performance in school and show recurrent
immaturity in their relation with other learners. Thirdly, these learners are known to be slow in mastering academic
skills, such as spelling rules or timetables. Fourthly, these learners are said to lack the ability to convey what they
learned between tasks; and lose track of time and events. Lastly, these learners are reported to create and keep track
of long-term goals. Supporting this view, Billy (2016) identified ten characteristics that are associated with slow
learners: difficulty in following multi-step directions; functioning at the ability significantly lower than the grade
level; being prone to creating immature interpersonal relationships; scoring at consistently low on academic and
achievement tests; poor self-image; smart at “hands-on” material (manipulative or lab activities); working on tasks at
a relatively slower rate than an average student; lacking long-range goals and living in the present; and having few
internal strategies (e.g., generalizing information, difficulty transferring and organizational skills. Elsewhere, Sparks,
Ganschow and Javorsky (1998) suggested that students who exhibit learning problems in foreign language have
subtle or overt native language learning difficulties and differences that affect their ability to learn a foreign language.
In the same vein, Lescano (1995) noted that the weakest skills among slow learners are reading and writing. In a
similar study, Khan (2008) noted that factors that contribute to students being slow learners include: lack of secure
environment; lack of emotional growth; absenteeism; large class size; untrained teachers; and limited opportunities.
Within language learning context, it was argued by Billy (2016) that factors that contribute to one being a slow
learner, include inadequate use of language learning strategies, and past negative learning experiences leading to one
losing interest. This is the main challenge for language instructors who are not equipped with the required skills and
teaching methods to deal with mixed-ability classes (Ansari, 2013). Therefore, instructors in mixed-ability
classrooms need to be given continuous training to overcome the challenges of the diverse learners (Al-Subaiei,
2017).
In this study, the term slow learners is used interchangeably with weak students within the language learning context
to refer to the learners with the ability to gain all the necessary academic skills through a depth and rate below that of
an average learner/student as defined by Muppudathi (2014); and as leaners who exhibit learning problems in foreign
language have subtle or overt native language learning difficulties and differences that affect their ability to learn a
foreign language (Sparks, Ganschow & Javorsky, 1996).
3.2 Fast Language Learners
It has been suggested in the extant literature that fast and bright students tend to be good language learners. Oxford
(1990) believes that these learners can learn without the teacher’s guidance and that these learners can use a teacher
as a resource to achieve maximum learning. Oxford (1990) noted that these learners do not see a teacher as
“all-knowing” rather they see the teacher as an equal partner or facilitator. Rubin and Thomson cited in Nunan (2000)
also held that fast learners or good language learners have the following characteristics: organize information about
language; find their own way; creative and experimental with language; create their own opportunities and identify
strategies to use language outside and inside the classroom; develop strategies to make sense of second language
without seeking to understand every work; learn to live with uncertainty; use mnemonics (word associations, rhymes)
in recalling what is learned); make errors work; use linguistic knowledge to master a second language; let the context
Published by Sciedu Press

257

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

(knowledge of the world and extra-linguistic knowledge) to help them comprehend language; learn production
techniques; learn chunks of language as formalized routines and wholes to enable them perform beyond their level of
competence; learn to make fast and intelligent guesses; learn different styles of writing and speech and to vary
language based on the situation’s formality. Other researchers (e.g., Brown, 2000; Oxford, 1990) indicated that fast
leaners live with uncertainty, take risks, are motivated to learn, use previous schemas to learn language, and use solid
strategies to learn language. For Billy (2016) fast learners have good academic skills, high intelligence and enjoy the
learning process. Billy (2016) argued that these learners could apply these skills of learning subjects by looking for
patterns to learn a language. For Lightbown and Spada (1997) good and fast language learners possess the following
characteristics: willing and accurate guessers; look for patterns; willing to make mistakes; communicate even
without language; enjoy grammar; pay attention to standards; practice whenever possible; and have good
self-confidence and self-image. Elsewhere, Hedge (2000) identified fast learners as “self-directed learners”.
According to Hedge (2000), fast learners have autonomous and good strategies in place. Hedge (2000) hinted that
these learners do not follow blindly everything said by the teacher rather they process information provided and
make it their own. Hedge (2000) noted that as self-directed learners, fast learners are often motivated to learn
language and are willing to give in their best to accomplish any task. Hedge (2000) emphasized that ‘Self-Directed
Learners’ display the following characteristics: know how to utilize resources independently; work productively with
teachers to achieve their objectives; know their needs; learn both outside and inside the classroom; adjust learning
strategies accordingly; divide and manage time in learning properly; learning with active thinking; and work and
coordinate with the teacher to learn language. Supporting this view, Hedge (2000) further suggested that fast learners
of language are autonomous and are both meta-cognitively and cognitively aware of the role they need to play in
learning language; monitor their learning; create opportunities to learn; and attempt to manage the learning process
outside and inside the classroom.
3.3 Past Literature on Challenges Experienced by Weak and Bright Students in Learning Language
Studies have documented various challenges encountered by foreign language learners: low/slow learners and
high/fast foreign language learners.
Some empirical studies investigated within American and British contexts have demonstrated at the post-secondary
and secondary levels that while good foreign language learners exhibit significantly stronger native written and oral
language skills and foreign language aptitude, weak foreign language learners experience challenges in acquiring
written and oral language skills and foreign language aptitude skills and knowledge. Other challenges experienced by
weak learners of foreign language as revealed in American and British studies include difficulties acquiring native
language skills; poor foreign language grades; anxiety in foreign language learning; low proficiency in foreign
language; low self-perceptions by weak language students; reading comprehension impairment; difficulty in word
level fluency and decoding (Hordiinko & Lomakina, 2015; AI-Subaiei, 2017; Chou & Luo, 2003; Svärd (2006;Baker,
2002; Ganschow et al., 1991; Sparks et al., 1992; Humes-Bartlo, 1989; Service, 1992).
For example, Hordiinko and Lomakina (2015) examined the challenges experienced by English teachers when
teaching students in mixed-ability classes and the probable causes of these challenges. Results revealed that teachers
find it challenging to strike a balance between weak, average and fast learners as weak students tend to feel
demotivated and develop inferiority complex and this affects participation in class. Hordiinko and Lomakina (2015)
noted that weak students tend to lack basic knowledge of the subject and this makes them feel frustrated when in
mixed-ability classrooms.
Similarly, AI-Subaiei (2017) used a sample of 33 participants to investigate challenges experienced by English
teachers when teaching mixed-ability classes and the methods used to cope. Results revealed that teachers of
mixed-ability English language classes tend to experience challenges that range from class management and
motivation issues, and challenges related to inadequate learning materials to teach learners in mixed classes and that
teachers find it challenging to meet the needs of learners with different abilities. It was noted that these challenges
could be mitigated using differentiation strategies.
In a similar study, Chou and Luo (2003) used a sample of 212 participants to explore the effects of mixed-ability and
levelled ability grouping on motivation of learners of English in Taiwanese elementary education. The study also
sought to determine the attitudes of participants towards mixed and levelled groups systems. The study finding
revealed that students prefer levelled grouping system against mixed ability grouping. It was also noted that the
majority of participants felt uncomfortable when placed in lower level of English classes. It was revealed that fast
learners or learners with high level of proficiency in English were worried about studying alongside those with low
level of proficiency in English in lower level mixed-ability classes.
Published by Sciedu Press

258

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Svärd (2006) interviewed upper secondary teachers in an attempt to investigate challenges faced by upper secondary
English teachers when teaching mixed-ability classes and ways to overcome these challenges. Challenges of teaching
mixed-ability classes were identified as dealing with learners with different learning abilities; difficulty of getting
attention from all learners; poor motivation by learners; frustration on the part of the teacher; uncooperativeness of
learners; and difficulties in planning lessons and creating work-material. Suggested ways of overcoming challenges
experienced by teachers of mixed-ability English classrooms were reported as creating good learning atmosphere,
structure and setting routines, and differentiation and motivation.
In another study on the challenges of teaching language to learners with mixed abilities, Baker (2002) reported the
challenges as differences in ability levels among students; attention issues; low motivation by students, and
frustration on the part of teachers in their attempt to meet the demands of learners with mixed abilities.
Other studies demonstrated that differences in foreign language aptitude and native language skills pose challenges
to teachers who deal with mixed-ability classes.
Studies have also suggested that slow students in learning language tend to demonstrate poorer native language skills
than those students with strong language skills (Ganschow et al., 1991; Sparks et al., 1992; Humes-Bartlo, 1989;
Service, 1992).
In a related study by Sparks et al. (1992a), a foreign language aptitude and native language measures were
administered to first-year foreign language learners in high schools. This study divided students into two groups:
based on foreign language teacher’s recommendation; and first-quarter foreign language grade (i.e., high-risk
learners who scored grades D or F or low-risk learners who achieved grades A or B. Low-risk foreign language
learners reported significantly greater foreign language aptitude, and stronger syntactic and orthographic or
phonological skills than high-risk foreign language learners did. In a similar study by Sparks et al. (1992b), a
comparison was made between 15 students diagnosed with a learning disability and enrolled with the first language
classes and high-and low-risk learners on similar testing measures. Finding revealed significantly greater foreign
language aptitude and stronger orthographic/phonological and syntactic skills by low-risk foreign language learners
compared to high-risk foreign language learners. No statistically significant differences were observed on most
foreign aptitude and native language measures between learning difficulty groups and high-risk-groups. However,
significant differences were noted in spelling in the two groups of learners. Humes-Bartlo (1989), foreign language
educator, noted that poor foreign language learners demonstrate milderlcdh deficits in native language skills than
good foreign language learners. Similarly, Service (1992) opined that the ability to compare semantic and syntactic
structures and orthographic/phonological tasks by learners predict skill in second language acquisition/learning.
Studies have also suggested that low score in foreign language grades is one of the challenges encountered by weak
language learners and this pose a challenge to teachers teaching mixed-ability classes. For example, in a study by
Sparks and Ganschow (1996), it was noted that significant differences exist on measures of foreign language aptitude
and native language skills among students who recorded grades A, B, C, D and F in high school and first-year
foreign language courses. It was also observed that students who achieved grade A’s had higher scores on those
measures compared to those who achieved grades B’s who in turn had higher scores than those who achieved grade
C’s. Other studies also reported that students who obtain higher foreign language grades have significantly stronger
foreign language aptitude skills and native language skills than those who obtain lower foreign language grades
(Sparks & Ganschow, 1995; Ganschow et al., 1991; Ganschow et al., 1994; Ganschow & Sparks, 1996).
Sparks, Ganschow and Patton (2005) used a sample of 100 co-ed learners and 154 women to determine the best
predictors of foreign language grades among students undertaking first-year high school foreign language courses.
Results revealed that students’ eight grade score and grade on the foreign language aptitude measure and native
language spelling were significant predictors of foreign language grade. In this study, Sparks, Ganschow and Patton
(2005) hypothesized that these variables offered support for Linguistic Coding Differences Hypothesis (LCDH) on
the ground that English class requires learners to use written language skills (writing and reading) and oral language
skills (speaking and listening) for classroom success.
4. Methodology
4.1 Research Design: Survey
Data used in the present study was collected from 100 teachers of foreign language (English) in the United Arab
Emirates (UAE) universities using a questionnaire. This tool was deemed appropriate because of its associated
advantages of collecting enormous data in short period of time and the ease with which it can be filled online and
returned for analysis. Moreover, questionnaire has the following advantages: (a) easy to be managed as the same
Published by Sciedu Press

259

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

questionnaire can be distributed to a large number of people; (b) more convenient for people as they can take their
time to complete it; and (c) less bias as it is asks the same questions for all respondents (May, 1993).
Accordingly, a structured questionnaire was used to collect responses to closed-ended questions posed to participants
regarding the possible challenges facing them as teachers of foreign language when teaching mixed-ability classes.
Questions contained in the questionnaire guaranteed the respondents’ anonymity and made it easier to mail the
questions to study participants via email. Anonymous feedback from study participants encouraged openness and
honesty, thus contributed to the reliability of data collected. Closed-ended questions also resulted in data that was
analysed quantitatively. These questions were formed based on previous similar studies that highlighted possible
challenge faced by teachers of foreign languages teaching slow and fast leaners in different contexts around the
world.
A five-point Likert scale was used to score the closed-ended questions. Likert Scale questionnaire is one of the most
widely used tools in researching popular opinion. It is a psychometric testing to measure viewpoints, attitudes and
opinions toward a particular subject, e.g., person, thing or idea. The responses to these questions ranged from 1 to
five with 5 denoting strong agree and 1 denoting strongly disagree. The researcher analysed these responses to show
challenges faced by teachers of weak students of foreign language.
The questionnaire was validated for clarity and relevance by 10 experts from the College of Humanities and Sciences
at Ajman University. Then it was sent to ten teachers as a pre-test for the research instrument. Accordingly,
modifications were made in the structure of some sentences, a few questions were broken into two statements and
some sentences were deleted for greater clarity.
A cover page was attached to inform the respondent the following: personal information; aims of the research; the
importance of the survey; and assurance of anonymity and confidentiality. The questionnaire consisted of three parts.
The first part investigated the demographic information about the participants such as gender and years of experience;
the second part was about challenges that teachers face in mixed-ability classes; and the third part included open
questions and asked teachers to state any affective strategies they apply in their classes in order to overcome those
challenges.
4.2 Sampling: Convenient Sampling
In this study, convenient non-probability sampling technique was adopted. The use of the convenient non-probability
sampling technique enabled the researchers to narrow down to specific target population of the study: teachers
teaching English in the UAE universities. It meant that the researchers could only select teachers conveniently,
especially those who could demonstrate the willingness to participate in the study. The sample of teachers was
selected to represent a population of teachers of slow and fast foreign language students in the UAE universities
which were located in Abu-Dhabi; Dubai and Ajman. Survey questionnaire was mailed to the study participants. The
research population was made up of 50 (50%) male and 50 (50%) female English teachers. This sample size was
deemed large enough to improve readers’ confidence in the findings of the study, improve its statistical power, and
allow for generalizability of the study findings to teachers of mixed-ability classes consisting of slow and fast
students in the UAE universities.
4.3 Data Analysis
Data analysis was undertaken using Microsoft excel. This involved quantifying challenges experienced by teachers
of slow and fast foreign language students in UAE universities. This involved analysing and presenting responses
scored on the five-point Likert scale in form of graphs and tables.
5. Results
Participants consented to challenges identified in the literature as representing the challenges experienced by teachers
when teaching language to Arab learners of English in mixed-ability classes. For example, majority of participants
agreed (strongly agreed-30.8% and agreed-42.5%) that it is challenging to meet the demands of fast and slow
learners in a typical classroom (Figure 1).

Published by Sciedu Press

260

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Figure 1. It is challenging to meet the demands of fast and slow learners in a typical classroom
It was also noted that participants overwhelmingly approved (strongly agree-42% and agree-39%) to the statement
that differences in the ability to learn language among fast learners and slow learners pose a challenge to effective
teaching of foreign language (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Differences in the ability to learn language between fast learners and slow learners pose a challenge to
effective teaching of foreign language
Participants strongly agreed (38.70%) and agreed (30%) that slow learners have foreign language learning
difficulties while fast learners learn language with ease (Figure 3).

Published by Sciedu Press

261

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Figure 3. Slow learners have foreign language learning difficulties while fast learners learn language with ease
Participants overwhelmingly approved (strongly agree-32.50% and agree-30%) the statement that weaker students
have a challenge in understanding orthographic/phonological aspects of language while fast students learn
orthographic/phonological aspects of language with ease (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Weaker students have challenges in understanding orthographic/phonological aspects of language while
fast students learn orthographic/phonological aspect of language with ease
Participants overwhelmingly (strongly agree-41.30% and agree-32.50%) approved the statement that slow learners
have weaker foreign language aptitude that negatively impacts on foreign language acquisition: fast learners have
strong foreign language aptitude (Figure 5).

Published by Sciedu Press

262

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Figure 5. Slow learners have weaker foreign language aptitude that negatively affects foreign language acquisition:
fast learners have strong foreign language aptitude
The majority of participants hold (strongly agree-35% and agree-30%) the view that mixed-ability classes tend to be
uncooperative and fast learners get bored easily (Figure 6).

Figure 6. Mixed-ability class tends to be uncooperative and fast learners get bored easily
The majority of participants strongly agreed (40%) or agreed (35%) that it is challenging to plan for the lesson to
teach a mixed-ability class (Figure 7).

Published by Sciedu Press

263

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Figure 7. It is challenging to plan for the lesson to teach a mixed-ability classroom
The majority participants hold (strongly agreed -38% and agreed-45%) that it is challenging to create appropriate
work-materials for the mixed-ability class (Figure 8).

Figure 8. It is challenging to create appropriate work-materials for the mixed-ability class
Participants overwhelmingly (strongly agree-46% and agree-41%) approved the statement that there are hardly any
ideal approaches to manage mixed-ability class (Figure 9).

Published by Sciedu Press

264

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Figure 9. There are hardly any ideal approaches to manage mixed-ability class
Participants strongly agree (42%) and agree (33%) that it is challenging to get the attention of all learners in a
mixed-ability classes (Figure 10).

Figure 10. It is challenging to get the attention of all learners in mixed-ability classes
Participants overwhelmingly (strongly agree-45% and agree-35%) approved the statement that they feel frustrated
when teaching mixed-ability classes because of low motivation of weak students (Figure 11).

Published by Sciedu Press

265

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Figure 11. I feel frustrated when teaching mixed-ability class because of low motivation of weak students
6. Discussion
Results of this study confirm that differences exist between slow students and fast students in language learning and
that these differences pose a hindrance to teachers when dealing with mixed-ability classes. Differences between
slow students and fast students were identified: challenging to meet the demands of fast and slow learners, slow
learners have foreign language learning difficulties while fast learners learn language with ease. Weaker students
have a challenge in understanding orthographic/phonological aspects of language, while fast students learn
orthographic/phonological aspects of language with ease; slow learners have weaker foreign language aptitude that
negatively affects their foreign language acquisition: fast learners enjoy strong foreign language aptitude.
Challenges of teaching English language to learners of English in the UAE universities were identified:
mixed-ability class tending to be uncooperative and fast learners get bored easily; challenging in planning for the
lesson to teach a mixed-ability class; challenging in creating appropriate work-materials for the mixed-ability class;
lack of best approaches to manage mixed-ability classes; challenging in getting attention of all learners in a
mixed-ability classes; and frustration when teaching mixed-ability classroom because of low motivation of weak
students. Results of the present study corroborate those reflected in previous studies (Hordiinko & Lomakina, 2015;
AI-Subaiei, 2017; Chou & Luo, 2003; Svärd, 2006; Baker, 2002).
For example, HordiiHordiinko and Lomakina (2015) identified challenges of teaching mixed-ability class as teachers
get frustrated when dealing with learners with mixed abilities. Svärd (2006) identified challenges of teaching
mixed-ability classes as dealing with learners with different learning abilities; difficulty in getting attention of all
learners; poor motivation by learners; frustration on the part of the teacher; uncooperativeness of learners; and
difficulties in planning lessons and creating work-material. For Baker (2002) challenges of teaching English
language to mixed-ability learners include attention issues; low motivation by students, and frustration on the part of
teachers in their attempt to meet the demands of learners with mixed abilities.
AI-Subaiei (2017) highlighted that challenges experienced by English teachers when teaching mixed-ability English
language classes noting that these challenges range from class management, motivation issues to inadequate learning
materials. Moreover, challenges include meeting the needs of learners with different abilities and thus require
instructors to employ effective management methods. This can be accomplished by using various methods in a bid to
experiment with different strategies and settle on the most effective ones.
According to Al-Subaiei (2017), teachers who have a positive attitude towards the diversity in terms of students’
abilities tend to be more successful in teaching mixed-ability classes. Al-Subaiei (2017), suggest that planning for
Published by Sciedu Press

266

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

specific tasks for various levels of ability for students can ensure that all learners are engaged in the learning process
and this, in turn, ensures efficiency and success in teaching mixed-ability classes. Strategies that seem to work best
were those that focused on students’ needs and those strategies that made learners to be actively engaged in their
learning processes. This is also referred to as student-centred approach to learning (AI-Subaiei, 2017).
For Rahman (2018), it is important for teachers of mixed-abilities foreign language teachers to regroup learners based
on their levels of abilities, allocated resources and provide motivation based on their abilities, as well as provide clear
instructions and engage in better classroom environment to achieve learning in mixed-ability classes.
Recommendations have been made for providing adequate teaching materials and teacher training. Rahman
specifically recommended that “teachers‟ have patience, teach slowly, offer clear instructions, be friendly, divide
bigger parts into easier steps, whilst especially helping the weaker students. The teachers want to see the best possible
classroom environment using the white board and overhead projector, repeating what is written, walking around the
students, giving feedback, correcting their mistakes in a very friendly way, thus enhances self-confidence and gives
them extra help. Finally, the study showed that teachers often face myriad of challenges while they rarely use the
mentioned strategies to overcome the challenges.
According to Şalli-Çopur (2005), in order to solve the problems of mixed-ability classes, teachers need to ensure the
teaching appeals to all senses, learning styles and all types of intelligence. Moreover, it should be based on a
meaningful context for all learners. To exemplify this point, Şalli-Çopur (2005) proposes that visuals should be used
that reflect all ages and proficiency levels, and that group-work activities for the students should be in cooperated to
allow learners learn from each other. The argument is that allowing interaction between strong students with weaker
students in mixed-ability classes can help the stronger ones to serve as a source of knowledge to weaker ones.
Alternatively, teacher may form groups unique to weaker students and stronger students, and provide them with
different tasks to allow more competent students to work on higher-level tasks, whilst the less competent students deal
with simpler tasks.
Shrivastava (2010) suggests that English teachers training and workshop should also be arranged to familiarize them
with various methods of conducting mixed-ability classes. In particular, English language teachers can create possible
classroom environment for students to allow for shifting between a single teaching methods to various methods.
Other suggestions include teachers working on varying degrees of structured pedagogy that can be applied in the same
class without letting students know that they are divided in groups based on their capabilities (Shrivastava,
2010). Shrivastava (2010) further recommends that teachers should employ various teaching methods and to
encourage learners work in mixed ability groups to facilitate them to learn from each other.
7. Conclusion
Teachers teaching students in mixed-ability foreign language classes experience challenges. These challenges
include mixed-ability classes tending to be uncooperative and fast learners get bored easily; challenging in planning
for the lesson to teach a mixed-ability class; challenging in creating appropriate work-materials for the mixed-ability
class; lack of best approaches to manage mixed-ability class; challenging in getting attention of all learners in
mixed-ability classes; and frustration when teaching mixed-ability classroom because of low motivation of weak
students.
The present study has some limitations. First, results cannot be generalizable beyond the UAE context given the use
of convenience sampling which may limit the ability to generalize the research results of the study into a broader
sample. Second, the taking of quantitative data through self-report measures may have created bias on the part of the
participants as there is a possible that participants may have engaged in filling the questions for the sake of it to
ensure they are completed as quickly as possible rather than provide honest responses. Future research should allow
more time for similar studies and follow up with interviews with study participants to confirm their responses. Again,
using qualitative methods, e.g., semi-structured interviews in future studies will help shed light on teachers’ deeper
explanations of the problems and reach better solutions from their perspectives. Therefore, there is a need for more
research works to identify methods to help teachers of English language overcome these challenges.
References
Ansari, M. S. (2013). Coping with the Problems of Mixed Ability Classes: A Study in the Context of Teaching
English as SL/FL. International Journal of English: Literature, Language & Skills.
AI-Subaiei, M.S. (2017). Challenges in Mixed Ability Classes and Strategies Utilized by ELI. Teachers to Cope with
Them. English Language Teaching; 10(6):182-189. Retrieved on 19th Dec 2019 from

Published by Sciedu Press

267

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/317241644_Challenges_in_Mixed_Ability_Classes_and_Strategies_U
tilized_by_ELI_Teachers_to_Cope_with_Them. https://doi.org/10.5539/elt.v10n6p182
Al-Shammakhi, F., & Al-Humaidi, S. (2015). Challenges Facing EFL Teachers in Mixed Ability Classes and
Strategies Used to Overcome Them. World Journal of English Language, 5(3). Retrieved on 19th Dec 2019
from http://wjel.sciedupress.com. https://doi.org/10.5430/wjel.v5n3p33
Baker, J. (2000). The English language teacher’s handbook: how to teach large classes with few resources. New
York: Continuum; London: Cassel.
Borah, R. (2013). Slow Learners: Role of Teachers and Guardians in Honing their Hidden Skills. International
Journal of Educational Planning & Administration, 139-143. Retrieved on 19th Dec 2019 from
https://www.ripublication.com/ijepa/ijepav3n2_04.pdf
Billy, P.P. (2016). Coping with slow learners. International journal of management and applied science, 2(12),
56-58. Retrieved on 19th Dec 2019 from http://www.auteachereducation.org/images/conf_book_2018.pdf
Brown, D. H. (2002). Strategies for Success: a practical guide to learning English. New York: Longman.
Chapman, C., & King, R. (2003). Differentiated instructional strategies for reading in the content areas. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Chou, K., & Luo, B. (2003). Effects of leveled and mixed ability grouping on English learning motivation in
Taiwanese elementary education. Conference: Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on English
teaching and Learning in the Republic of China.
Hordiinko, N.M., & Lomakina, L.V. (2015). Teaching EFL to Mixed-Ability Classes: Strategies, Challenges, and
Solutions.
Advanced
Education,
3,
38-42.
Retrieved
on
19th
Dec
2019
from
http://ae.fl.kpi.ua/article/view/44198. https://doi.org/10.20535/2410-8286.44198
Holden, B. (2002). Listen and Learn, English Teaching Professional, Issue 23, pages 18-20
Hedge, T. (2000). Teaching and learning in the language classroom. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Ganschow, L., Sparks, R.L., & Javorsky, J. (1998). Foreign Language Learning Difficulties: An Historical
Perspective. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 31(3), 248-258. Retrieved on 19th Dec 2019 from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9599957. https://doi.org/10.1177/002221949803100304
Ganschow, L., Sparks, R., Javorsky, J., Pohlman, J., & Bishop-Marbury, A. (1991). Identifying native language
difficulties among foreign language learners in college: A "foreign" language learning disability? Journal of
Learning
Disabilities,
24,
530-541.
Retrieved
on
19th
Dec
2019
from
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1765728. https://doi.org/10.1177/002221949102400905
Humes-Bartlo,
M.
(1989).
Variation
in
children's
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511611780.004

ability

to

learn

second

languages.

In K. Hyltenstom & L. Obler (Eds.), Bilingualism across the life span (pp. 41-54). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Khan,
S.M.
(2008).
Education
of
slow
learner.
Retrieved
25
July
http://research-educationedu.blogspot.com/search/label/Education%20of%20Slow%20LeaRner

2018

from

Lightbown, P., & Spada, N. M. (2006). How languages are learned. Oxford University Press, USA.
Lightbown, P.M., & Spada, N. (1997). How Languages are Learned. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
May, T. (1993). Social Research: Issues, Methods, and Process. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Muppudathi, G. (2014). Role of Teachers on Helping Slow Learners to bring out their Hidden Skills. International
Journal
of
Scientific
Research,
3(3),
98-99.
Retrieved
on
19th
Dec
2019 from
http://www.iosrjournals.org/iosr-jrme/papers/Vol-6%20Issue-6/Version-7/E0606072326.pdf
Nunan, D. (2000). Language Teaching Methodology, Harlow, Pearson Education Ltd. Page 171
Oxford, R. (1990). Language Learning Strategies, Boston, Heinle and Heinle Publishers
Rahman, M. (2018) Teaching English Language to the Mixed-ability Classes at the HSC Level in Bangladesh:
Challenges and Probable Solutions. International Journal of Ethics in Social Sciences, 6 (1) 29-50. Retrieved on
19th Dec 2019 from http://www.crimbbd.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/6.1.3a.pdf

Published by Sciedu Press

268

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

http://ijhe.sciedupress.com

International Journal of Higher Education

Vol. 9, No. 1; 2020

Şalli-Çopur, D. (2005). Coping with the Problems of Mixed Ability Classes. The Internet TESL Journal, Vol. XI, No.
8, Middle East Technical University (Ankara, Turkey). Retrieved on 19th Dec 2019 from
http://iteslj.org/Techniques/Salli-Copur-MixedAbility.html
Sailaja, S.S. (2018). ELT in Mixed Ability Classrooms-Teacher Challenges and Strategies in the Rural Context.
International Journal of Academic Research, 5(11). Retrieved on 19th Dec 2019 from
http://ijar.org.in/stuff/issues/v5-i11/v5-i11-a004.pdf
Shrivastava, A. (2010). Coping with the Problems of Mixed Ability Students. Language in India. Vol.10. Retrieved
on 1 July 2018 from www.languageinindia.com 10.
Sparks, R., & Ganschow, L. (1996). Teacher’s perceptions of students' foreign language academic skills and
affective characteristics. Journal of Educational Research, 89, 172-185. Retrieved on 19th Dec 2019 from
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00220671.1996.9941323.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220671.1996.9941323
Svärd, A. (2006). The challenge of mixed-ability classes. How should upper secondary English teachers work in
order to help the weaker students?
Sparks, R., Ganschow, L., & Javorsky, J. (1992). Diagnosing and accommodating the foreign language learning
problems of college students with learning disabilities. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice, 7, 150-160.
Retrieved on 19th Dec 2018 from https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1992-44933-001
Service, E. (1992). Phonology, working memory, and foreign language learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology,
45A,
21-50.
Retrieved
on
19th
Dec
2018
from
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1080/14640749208401314 . https://doi.org/10.1080/14640749208401314
Valentic, D. (2005). ELT in multi-level classes. Hupe Newsletter, 23.Lescano, A.A. (1995). The remedial English
project. English Teaching Forum, 33(4).

Published by Sciedu Press

269

ISSN 1927-6044

E-ISSN 1927-6052

