Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related
enterprises in rural Denmark: Implications for rural
enterprises in Ghana

Isaac K. Arthur1
Obi Berko O. Damoah2

Abstract
Developing economies stands to gain much by learning from the experiences of the developed
economies. The study aims to explore the extent to which rural food enterprises utilise their
capabilities to organise their resources in the experience economy to create value and remain
competitive. The article uses a qualitative open-ended interviews to explore the issues using two
cases of small food related enterprises in Denmark. The purpose of the method is to allow the
respondents to construct the meaning of the topic from their own perspectives. Using the dominant
themes as the main techniques to analyse the data, coupled with the hermeneutics approach, the
results show that an entrepreneur’s capability is crucial with regard to small enterprises in rural
settings. Specifically, the two case studies illustrate the capabilities of business owners to identify
assets at their establishments and the municipality level and reconfigure them into objects aimed
at providing experiences for visitors seeking out for rural idyll. The implications of this study on
policy and practice on entrepreneurship development in rural Ghana are suggested based on the
results.
Key words: Resource-based view, capabilities, rural entrepreneurs, food related enterprises,
Experience Economy, Denmark, Ghana

1
2

Department of Geography and Resource Development, University of Ghana, Legon E-Mail: ikarthur@ug.edu.gh
University of Ghana Business School E-Mail: obodamoah@ug.edu.gh

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015 pages 58–78

58

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana

Introduction
To paraphrase Harvey (2008), the coercive laws of competition have led to the ceaseless
introduction of new technologies and organisational forms, as these create a condition for
capitalists to out-compete those using inferior methods. Beside the introduction of technological
innovations on the market are non-technological ideas unleashed by businesses. Among the
various capitalist driven ideas seen on the market is the commercialisation of experiences (the
experience economy). By definition, it marks the offerings of goods and services that engage
individual consumers on some level and exhibit idealistic, aesthetic and symbolic meanings. The
experiential embodiments of goods/services represent their added value, their basis for warranting
higher prices (Pine & Gilmore, 1999) and the “key differentiating element from other products”
(Arthur & Hracs, 2015, p. 98). The experience economy is thus indicative of a shift from traditional
marketing that focused on the functional features and benefits of products to creating memorable
experiences for the consumer’s enjoyment (Schmitt, 1999; Pine & Gilmore, 1999; Williams,
2006). Although the commercialisation of experience is an old phenomenon (Holbrook, 2000),
lately it has become a widespread ethos for consumer service businesses in particular to obtain
competitive advantage in the luxury consumption segment of the market (Poulsson & Kale, 2004).
This is common in the advanced capitalist economies where consumers’ disposable incomes are
very high (Lorentzen, 2009). However, the ubiquity of this phenomenon has become more
apparent as it is gaining ground in the global south, particularly in countries experiencing socioeconomic success.
In the Scandinavia, policy makers have identified the experience economy as a potential growth
model for municipalities and regions (Sundbo, 2009; Smidt-Jensen et al., 2009). Businesses
including food and tourism related enterprises in Danish rural communities are encouraged to
exploit opportunities in the experience economy to energise business profits, competitiveness and
local development (North Denmark Region, 2008). This resonates with the widespread public
dependence on the private business sectors to offer local economic welfare (Leatherman &
Marcouiller, 1996).
However, just encouraging businesses to operate in the experience economy seems a bit narrow as
there is a need to recognise that enterprises are heterogeneous in terms of their resource
endowments and capabilities (Penrose, 1959; Barney, 1991; Collis & Montgomery, 1995; Grant,
2002; Barney et al., 2011). Indeed, in contrast to large enterprises in the urban areas, small firms
in rural settings naturally cannot compete easily due to their inability to finance technological
changes or radical innovations on the market. The remote rural locations of enterprises also suggest
that they face problems such as “small local markets, isolation from larger markets, and remoteness
from the business mainstream” (Baker et al., 2007, p. 183). Interestingly, these issues are
widespread in sub-Saharan Africa where for decades policy makers have been experimenting on
various innovative strategies to promote rural entrepreneurship that will foster rural development
and to improve the welfare of rural citizens. Although conventional wisdom suggests that
entrepreneurship is key to rural development in sub-Saharan Africa, low productivity and income
59

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015
yields appear to characterise most rural entrepreneurs (Nagler & Naudé, 2015). These challenges
may be attributed to the lack of innovative strategies (Robson et al. 2009) and the inability of many
enterprises to create market opportunities (Ampadu, 2010). Generally, rural enterprises need to
overcome the issues constraining their success and competitiveness by being creative and
innovative. In effect, it is imperative to understand the extent to which small rural enterprises are
attempting to stand out in a growing competitive market by exploiting their internal environment.
The aim of this article is therefore to explore how the experience economy can play an important
part in rural enterprises by way of describing the nature of experience offerings of food related
entrepreneurs. The key objective is to draw on the resource based view theory of the firm
(Wernefelt, 1984; Barney, 1991; Grant, 2002) to understand how enterprises recognise business
opportunities to create value and combine resources to exploit such opportunities in the experience
economy. Considering the importance of this study to rural enterprise competitiveness, our other
objective is to draw implications from the findings for rural enterprises in a sub-Saharan African
country like Ghana. Although there are numerous studies on the resource based view and
experience economy concepts empirical works on the resource-based view privilege large firms
which are predominantly urban. Essays relating to how small food related enterprises in rural
settings commercialise experiences by exploiting their internal environment is under-explored.
Therefore, this article contributes to the existing studies in geography by showing an example of
how the resource-based view theory works in small enterprises in a rural setting. The empirical
section of this article comprises case studies of two food related enterprise located in Thisted
Municipality, Denmark. Interestingly, since innovation is an important feature in entrepreneurship
(Henderson, 2002), this article also highlights on the innovativeness of rural food entrepreneurs in
their quest to offer customers experience. Particular emphasis is placed on the process by which
enterprises introduce products and utilise market opportunities based on the entrepreneur’s
capability to mobilise and re-organise resources.
The article is organised as follows: The next section discusses the theoretical foundation of the
article. The most directly relevant framework is from the viewpoints of the resource-based view
theory of the firm and the experience economy. In addition are discussions of key concepts which
the article draws on as framework for empirical analyses. This is followed by a description of the
research’s methodological approach and the rural community in Denmark where the research took
place. Thereafter, the article’s results, analysis and discussion are presented. The final section
presents the conclusion and policy implications.

Theoretical Foundation
The Experience Economy
Ever since Pine & Gilmore (1999) was published, scholarly works on the experience economy
have become widespread (see, for example, Richards, 2001; Sundbo & Darmer, 2008, Lassen et
al., 2009; Lorentzen, 2009; Smidt-Jensen et al., 2009; Sørensen et al., 2010; Bille, 2012; Freire60

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana
Gibb, 2011). As indicated earlier, the experience economy marks a shift in demand for functional
products and services to distinctive and memorable experience offerings. This development echoes
Toffler’s (1970) prediction that experience production and consumption will be a key feature of
the post service economy. The experience economy is considered as one of the booming sectors
of the global economy (Richards, 2001; Oh et al., 2007). Undoubtedly, this can be attributed to
the rising demands of post-modern consumers and increasing disposable incomes of people
(Bourdieu, 1984). Enterprises that have become aware of this phenomenon are thus looking for
new means and new inputs to make their products experiential (Poulsson & Kale, 2004).
Consequently, the experience economy indicates a reaction to the growing desires for consumption
in society (Harvey, 2008).
In the consumer behaviour literature, Hirschman and Holbrook characterise experience as the
hedonistic craving of consumers and relate it to the “multi-sensory, fantasy and emotive aspects
of one’s experience with products” (1982, p. 92). The multi-sensory attributes involve experience
through “tastes, sounds, scents, tactile impressions and visual images” (Blythe, 2009, p. 115). As
such, they result in the development of historic (remembrance) or fantasy imagery in the
individual’s mind, which can stimulate his/her emotions. This means experiential involvement
entails “both cognitive and affective elements, since it acts on both the mind and emotions of a
consumer” (ibid). From the marketing literature standpoint, experiences can be defined as a kind
of offering that can be added to goods or services to create a fourth product category that satisfy
and extract value from consumers (Carù and Cova 2003; Schmitt 1999; Pine & Gilmore, 1999).
Specific examples include stories attached to food and wine services for a café’s guests (Pine &
Gilmore 1999). This is indicative of a “symbolic value” (Sundbo & Darmer, 2008, p. 1), which
consumers will purchase in addition to the main product, and accordingly pay a higher price for.
However, not all experiences are add-ons to functional products as suggested by Pine & Gilmore
(1999). Some constitute a core product such as festivals, boating, mounting climbing, theatre,
cityscapes, sporting and music events (Richards, 2001; Scott, 2010; Sundbo, 2009).
It is commonly acknowledged that experiences are inherently personal (Gentile et al., 2007; Pine
& Gilmore, 1999) and occur particularly when one comes into contact with a given offering (Chang
& Horg 2010; Lorentzen 2009). These engagements manifest in different contexts such as sensory,
emotional, physical, intellectual and spiritual (Pine & Gilmore 1999; Hirschman and Holbrook,
1982; Gentile et al., 2007). Accordingly, these experiential effects serve as a vital element to
understand consumer behaviour (Addis and Holbrook 2001) and the basis on which enterprises
capitalize by bringing experiences to the market.
It is imperative to emphasise that not all experiential offerings are created or consumed in the same
manner (Arthur & Hracs, 2015). For example, Pine & Gilmore (1999) shows entertainment,
education, escapism and aesthetics as typologies of experience realms which suggest different
levels of intensity and engagement from consumers. While entertainment or aesthetic experiences
typically involve passive participation from consumers, escapist or educational experiences are
rather more active and hands-on in nature. An entertainment experience, for example, may involve
listening to live music in a restaurant, but an educational or escapist experience may involve taking
61

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015
cooking lessons in a farm house or playing an active role in creating a new product (Arthur &
Hracs, 2015). By extension, firms purposefully distort the margins between production and
consumption and charge consumers a fee to co-produce their own unique experiences (Prahalad
and Ramaswanny, 2004; Arthur & Hracs, 2015). Hence, enterprises attempt to create a space,
artifacts and contexts that enable interaction and let consumers co-create their own experiences
(Carù and Cova, 2003). Such exchanges constitute new bases of competitive advantage since
traditionally, firms determined what was to be produced and sold on the market. However, the rise
of so-called ‘user-driven’ innovation (von Hippel, 2005) means this trend has shifted to prioritize
consumers (Prahalad and Ramaswamy, 2004). This contradicts Pine & Gilmore’s (1999) view that
experiences are created by a producer for the customer. Conceptually, the experience economy
represents an index of ‘cultural’ and ‘marketing’ innovation and a spectacular form of consumerdriven capitalism aimed at offering differentiated outputs that stimulate the cognitive, sensational
and affective elements in the consumer.
Resource-based view and Capability
The resource-based view (RBV) assumes that a firm’s performance and sustainable
competitiveness is determined by its internal resource capacity (Wenerfelt, 1984; Barney, 1991).
Several scholarly works including Amit & Shoemaker (1993) maintain that resources consist of
assets, capabilities, firm characteristics, organizational processes, information, knowledge, and
routines which are owned and controlled by a firm. According to these scholarly works, resources
empower firms to design and execute strategies that enhance their efficiency and effectiveness.
Among the independent variables of the RBV include resource rarity, immutability, capability, and
ordinary resources (financial resources, equipment). However, this article uses two of the
independent variables – capability and ordinary resources as the main analytical framework for the
study.

Analytical Framework
Resource and capabilities
Researchers differentiate capability from other resources. Grant (1991) argues that whilst resources
are inputs (e.g., skills of the workforce, financial capital equipment) that are put into the
transformation process, capability refers to the capacity of a team that enhances the ability of the
group to perform specific activities. Amit & Schoemaker (1993) concur with Grant’s (1991) view
of ordinary resources and argue that capability refers to a firm’s capacity to deploy resources via
organizational process to achieve organizational outcomes. Implicitly, it is the capability of the
firm that enhances efficient utilization of other resources to produce outputs. Therefore, resources
without capability make it less likely for a firm to achieve competiveness in the market place. The
reason for this is because capability is needed to coordinate, organize and deploy resources in a
unique way to achieve organizational objectives.
62

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana
For instance, Barney and Hesterly (2008, p. 74) suggest that capabilities constitute an enterprise’s
resources. They define capabilities as the “tangible and intangible assets that enable a firm to take
full advantage of other resources it controls”. The term capability is also defined in the
organisational perspective as the “capacity to undertake particular productive activity” (Grant
2002, p. 145). This means an enterprise’s ability to engage in ventures that will enhance its
profitability. Such ventures are carried out through the entrepreneur’s ability to anticipate or
respond to changing consumer demand, understand which know-how or skills to apply and
determine suitable approaches to implement innovative solutions (Arthur, 2011). Essentially, it is
about a firm’s distinctive abilities to “recognise and exploit” (Foss, 1999, p. 3) opportunities on
the market. Lorentzen (2005) shows the relevance of organisational capability as she argues that
firms’ continued existence in a competitive, globalised environment is based on their
“organisational capabilities to innovate” (p. 1013). Although most of the above conceptualisations
represent different viewpoints, they tend to have a common logic which translates into a suggestion
that enterprise resources function through a systemic interactive process, and the abilities of
individual enterprises to effectively exploit their resources through such interactive process
signifies their capabilities. Capabilities are thus path-dependent and are indicative of the glue that
puts all the resources of enterprises together and allows them to be exploited profitably (Day,
1994).
Following from the above, the basic assumption of the analytical framework that informs our study
is that it is the capability of an enterprise’s owner/manager that enables him/her to coordinate and
deploy other resources to maximize the activities of the experience economy and create value.
Figure 1 below presents the analytical framework that informs the study.
Figure 1: Analytical framework

Source; Authors

63

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015

Methodological Approach
Despite the experience economy being geographically ubiquitous, rural areas are said to “differ
markedly in their economic structure and activity” (Marsden, 1999 p. 503) and the existing
literature privileges examples in urban areas. Therefore, we chose to situate the empirics of this
article in remote rural settings to explore new territory. In particular, we attempt to understand the
capabilities of two small food related enterprises in recognising and utilising resources to enhance
their competiveness. We purposively drew our cases from a larger research which examined how
food enterprises in three Danish rural areas can stimulate local development and competitiveness
by operating in the experience economy (Arthur, 2011; Arthur & Hracs, 2015). Although we do
not seek to generalise the findings of this article on the basis of two cases, we deliberately chose
contrasting enterprises (Hyett et al., 2014) in order to compare them by way of finding patterns
and commonalities within the strategies employed by the individual enterprises (Thorne, 2000).
The findings presented are drawn from qualitative interviews of the two enterprises. There were
two respondents who participated in the interviews, that is, one per enterprise. They were
specifically the Assistant Manager of a brewery and the Owner-Manager of a farm guest house.
These two are middle class and educated individuals who are natives of the municipality and have
lived there for a long time. We found the use of open-ended interviews appropriate to explore and
have a better contextual understanding of the process of enterprises resource utilisation, an ill
understood phenomenon in the experience economy literature (Thorne, 2000; Boateng, 2014). The
interviews took the form of face-to-face conversations that lasted for approximately 90 minutes.
Table 1 presents the description of the case firms.
Table 1. Sample of Enterprises
Enterprise Name

Type of
Enterprise

A/S Thisted
Bryghus
Thy
Bondegårdsferie &
Gårdsbutik

Brewery
Farm, farm
shop
Guesthouse

Year of
Establishment

Number
of employees

Size

Ownership

1902

32

small

Shareholders

1994

None

small

Family

Source: Authors
Each interview was recorded on a digital recorder, transcribed verbatim and coded based on
dominant themes (Arthur & Hracs, 2015). As part of the analysis, individual enterprises and their
activities were described. We integrated verbatim quotations into the analysis to demonstrate how
respondents conveyed meanings and experiences in their own words. Furthermore, we employed
a hermeneutics approach – interpreting interview responses based on our orientation of theories
employed in this study. The responses have been complemented with personal observations from
the interviews including impressions about places (the internal and external environments of the
64

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana
enterprises), products and respondents (Davidsen, 2008). We also contextualized the interview data
by analysing documents such as enterprise brochures, flyers and posters.
The study Area (Thisted Municipality)
After the Danish local government reforms in 2007, Thisted municipality (also known as Thy)
became one of the eleven municipalities forming the North Jutland Region of Denmark. Currently,
the municipality constitutes an amalgamation of three existing municipal areas - Thisted,
Hanstholm and Sydthy. The municipality is a coastal area situated North West of Denmark. It is
approximately 420 km from Copenhagen, Denmark’s capital. It has a population of 44, 249
inhabitants, representing the fourth largest population in the North Jutland Region, and with a
density of 41 inhabitants per km2 (Thisted Kommune, 2015). The municipality covers an area of
1,073.70 km2 which stretches from Bulbjeg in the north to Agger in the south and has a coastline
of 226km (ibid.). The “rich natural and symbolic landscape” (Scott 2010, p.1569) of the
municipality comprises white sand beaches and the first national park (Nationalpark Thy) in
Denmark.
The national park houses some important sites of Danish history, lake, game reserve and
congregation of plants and animals including rare species that constitute a basis for tourism (Arthur
& Hracs, 2015). The most interesting historical marks on the park are grave mounds from the
Bronze Age and numerous World War II German bunkers along the coast. Basically, the
picturesque scenery and captivating cultural history of the national park is also considered as a
potential source for branding and marketing an array of high quality foods in the area
(Landsbygruppen Thy, 2008). As we shall see later in this article, the national park is utilised by
a local food-related enterprise as part of its experience-based strategies. Other experiential related
uses of the park include the annual food festival dubbed Smag på Thy (Taste of Thy), held in
September. The most exciting feature about the food festival is that ingredients including seafood
and game in the menus are all obtained within the park. The menus are historical in nature with a
modern twist.

65

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015

Figure 2 Map of North Jutland Region, Denmark showing Thisted Municipality.
Source: Region Nordjylland
The Hanstholm harbour, which is Denmark’s leading fishing harbour, is located in the
municipality. There are approximately 1700 enterprises which provide jobs for people in several
sectors including the food industry (Thisted Kommune, 2015). These industries, like in many other
places, are either small or large. Indeed, the municipality has a hallmark of producing some of
Denmark’s finest animal products (especially pigs), foodstuffs, and alcoholic beverages. Food
related enterprises in the municipality are predominantly small and medium size. They usually
have to compete with larger enterprises on both national and global scales. Consequently, the
development of new strategies or innovative ways to compete is generally imperative to enterprises
in the area.

66

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana

Results, Analysis and Discussion
Case 1: “The farm guesthouse experience”
Thy Bondegårdsferie & Gårdsbutik is owned by Jørgen Stubkjær Immersen, who manages the
business with his wife, Lisbeth. The business is situated in the town of Snedsted, a small
commercial town in Thy. Jørgen inherited the farm from his father in 1994 and produces crops
(mostly potatoes), fruits, vegetables, poultry and livestock products, most of which were
previously delivered to shops in Thy. The entrepreneurial drive in Jørgen led him to establish a
farm shop where he sells both his fresh and processed farm products. Subsequently, he turned parts
of the farm into a guesthouse, particularly for holiday makers with young children. Key notable
reconfigurations on the farm estate are some pig stalls converted into bedrooms and a cow shed
turned into an in-door sporting/playing facility for children. The guesthouse is largely patronised
by people from other parts of Denmark and a few from abroad, particularly European countries.
Experience Offerings
Certainly the recreational facilities for children and participatory experience provided at the
guesthouse are to make a stay at the place memorable, nostalgic, attractive, eventful and more
exciting. Guests are allowed to engage in voluntary services on the farm. For example, while the
adults are helping in harvesting crops with the farmer, the children collect eggs of the poultry and
feed animals. Significantly, since the children can see, touch, smell and hear some animals for the
first time and can learn about when, how and what they eat, parents are prepared to pay for this
amusing experience. The children have a variety of in-door and out-door facilities where they can
play and entertain themselves. Furthermore, guests are invited into a hut to make pancakes.
Evidently, this marks an innovative and strategic approach by the owner to produce and
commercialise memorable experiences, and also to promote and sell his marmalades which are
consumed together with the pancakes.
To sell the marmalades better the owner attaches stories related to the history of Thisted to the
process. In his own words, the essence of the story is to “attract more people to buy”. Although
the story suggests an act of promoting the marmalades, it also represents the valorization of the
history and image of Thisted into the product. Apart from immersing the consumer into a learning
experience with the story, it resonates with Ray’s (1998) notion of the cultural economy approach
to rural development, which stresses on “strategies to transform local knowledge into resources”
(Kneafsey, 2001, p. 763). Staying at the guesthouse does not only suggest a feature of both cultural
and experience economy, but also ‘agro-tourism’ in a rural area (Goodman, 2004). This kind of
experience offering emphasises on giving visitors, largely from urban areas, an authentic feel of a
rural way of life or cultural landscape as opposed to a staged experience in urban areas (Gilmore
& Pine, 2007). It reflects a diversion of traditional farming activity into the discourse of postmodernism, characterised by a feature of, after Harvey (1990, p. 426), “the emergence of a new
geography of capitalist development” in a rural context.
67

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015
Resources and capabilities for creating experiences
The account above supports the analytical framework which informs the study (Figure 1). Ideally,
the guesthouse experience reflects another tourist extravagance born out of an entrepreneurial
action in a rural context (Anderson, 2000). Undoubtedly, one can explain that the owner-manager
has shown capability in the light of the RBV because the capacity to utilise the farm, the image
and the history of the geographical area in which it is situated as selling points is real evidence of
entrepreneurial capability (Grant, 1991). Implicitly, the business and its products are resources,
but the capacity to identify the approach so that the product is bought is a real example of capability
resource. What this means is that without this capability, the product can be available, but there
could be no sales in the recreation, farming and storytelling offer. Consequently, setting up a stage
for all these experiences to take place is an expensive venture. As the owner remarks: “it cost a lot
of money to start or run this business…” This indicates that financial resources are vital to
enterprises that seek to compete via the offerings of experiences. This confirms our conceptual
framework that for a capability to be useful, there must first be the availability of ordinary
resources. Apart from the enterprise’s internal resources, the management of its external relation
with the Landsforeningen for Landboturisme (National Association of Agro‐Tourism) (authors’
own translation) appears to play an important role towards the creation of customer experience.
This can be deduced from the farmer’s statement:

“We have some standards that we have to meet in order to qualify to be in this network, and we
have some courses through which we can learn to become better operators in different areas. The
organisation sets the standards for us to follow...”

Basically, the standards set by the association can be explained as influencing the types of services
and facilities which subsequently enhance customer experience. Indeed, the knowledge and
creative acumen of the owner demonstrates the quality of the enterprise human capital. Based on
Amit & Shoemaker’ (1993) definition of capabilities mentioned earlier, the enterprise’s capabilities
represent an ability to utilise different resources to create value. This in some sense demonstrates
the owner-manager’s competence in reconfiguring his internal and external resources to deal with
the increasing trends in production and consumption of rural cultural experiences (see e.g.
Kneafsey, 2001).
Case 2: “Storytelling and tour experience”
A/S Thisted Bryghus is a small-sized brewery established in 1902 in the city of Thisted. It produces
approximately 10 million bottles of assorted beer annually, which are in the genre of conventional
and organic. It is owned by over 1300 shareholders, and has 32 employees and a market share of
about 0.6 percent of the national total sales. Despite its small market share in Denmark, the brewery
takes pride in its innovativeness as being the first to introduce organic beer on the Danish market.
68

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana
The introduction of the organic beer is an attempt to develop a competitive edge and a new market
niche. The brewery has a tradition of organising a picnic for its staff on the Nationalpark Thy
where they collect bog-myrtle (Sweet Gail plants). An extract of this plant is used as flavouring
and bittering agent for one of the beer brands, ‘Porse Guld’. In collaboration with the local tourist
office, the brewery organises visitors’ tours in its facility during the summer and winter seasons,
for which visitors pay an admission fee. Individuals can participate in the tour during the day
whereas groups such as associations and clubs take their turn in the evenings. The tour is climaxed
with visitors being given an opportunity to taste/drink any of the brewery’s products.
Experience Offerings
Innovation in the food industry involves a complex process that can take place in the different
segments of the food system (Capitanio et al., 2010). This may include the introduction of new
food products as seen in the introduction of the organic beer. It can also be a new marketing strategy
to make a product more attractive, as seen in the story of the Porse Guld beer. Besides giving
consumers a tasting experience of bog-myrtle extract in the beer, the brewery deliberately tells
this story to give consumers a learning experience. According to the Assistant General Manager
of the brewery “…it is a great story we try to tell....” The brewery has put this story among others
on its internet website where visitors can have a virtual experience. The key plot in this story is the
national park where the bog-myrtle plant is collected from. It symbolises a learning experience for
consumers as they are engaged with the symbolic and aesthetic impressions of Thisted’s
‘wildscape’ (Vepsäläinen & Pitkänen, 2010).
From the Assistant Manager’s perspective, the tour events in the brewery are simply for
promotional purposes as such tours only allow visitors/tourists from all walks of life to experience
their production plant and operations. Yet, one can interpret this tour as an experiential event that
visitors pay a fee to engage all five senses with a smelling experience of raw materials such as
baileys, hobs and bog-myrtle, a touching and feeling experience of objects, a seeing experience of
production processes, raw materials, workers, and machinery, a hearing experience of listening to
sounds of machinery, and finally a tasting experience of assorted drinks including the bitter flavour
of the Porse Guld beer. They also get to obtain insights of the brewery’s history and stories (both
old and newer). Such multiple experiences encompass what Pine & Gilmore (1999) define as the
four experience realms which consumers can be engaged with. Here the visitors’ pleasures of
listening to the tour guide become both entertaining and learning experiences, as they passively
absorb the event through their senses and actively participate in the tour simultaneously. Visitors
also actively participate in creating their own experience when they choose particular drinks in the
visitors’ lounge after the guided tour.
Resources and capabilities for creating experiences
Pine & Gilmore have argued on charging admission fee for experience offerings along the
following lines:
69

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015
“You may design the most engaging experience around your service offering or within your retail
establishment, but unless you charge people specifically for watching or participating in the activities
performed- just for entering your place, as do concert halls, theme parks, motion-based attractions,
and other experience venues- you’re not staging an economic experience” (Pine & Gilmore, 1999,
p. 62).
A reflection on the above suggests that the entrance fee to the tour is indicative of staging an
economic experience that contradicts the notion of a right to free access to public goods experience.
Accordingly, it adds value to a routine production process that allows consumers to exercise the
choice to consume the process as a heightened experience. In general, the tour demonstrates an
innovative approach to market the brewery and its products through the medium of customer
experience and to attract more customers through these engagements. This in addition confirms
the analytical framework that informs the study. Implicitly, the management first conceived that
the idea of tasking staff to guide tourists represented value to the latter, and the fact that they were
prepared to pay a premium price for the service is an indication of a capability to mobilise other
resources to create value for customers. Another piece of evidence is that the brewery’s
management recognises that making visitors to sit and drink at the production environment is a
value. This also shows an indication of capability on the part of this firm to mobilise the resources
to create value. This process represents a means through which experiences could be co-produced
between the brewery and customers. Furthermore, it opens up an opportunity for the brewery’s
market orientation by acquiring specific information from consumers (Chen, 2006).
Overall, there is a demonstration of the capacity of the enterprises to mobilise different internal
resources to operate in the experience economy. The critical resources used in this case are physical
- the brewery’s facility, location in Thisted, and the bog myrtle from the Nationalpark Thy. The
knowledge of utilising these resources tends to show the nature of tangible assets of the enterprise
and how they are combined. Just as in the previous case, this enterprise shows creativity in using
its facility as a space to get closer to consumers and school them on its products, how they are
made, as well as the machinery and other inputs used in production. The use of raw material from
the national park and promoting it via storytelling marks a “valorisation of resources that have a
place identity” (Ray 1998, p. 6).
Additionally, Penrose’s (1959) view on the functionality of an enterprise’s resources towards its
creative prospect indicates that resources can be utilised for multiple purposes. Such resource
utility in the brewery is seen in employees’ role in going on picnics to collect bog myrtle and
guiding visitors at the tour events. This does not only reveal the brewery’s innovative capability
but also indicates useful combinations of resources. The enthusiasm of these employees to
contribute to such productive ventures represents a source of competitive advantage for the
brewery (Wright et al., 2001).

70

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana
Conclusion and Policy Implications
Against the backdrop of a highly competitive marketplace, this article explored in two case studies
the ways in which food-related entrepreneurs utilise resources and capabilities in operating in the
experience economy. In other words, the article sought to identify the mechanisms through which
these entrepreneurs are adding value and marketing their products. The key motivation for this
study was based on the suggestion that although the offering of experiences may be plausible in
any given business, individual enterprises are different and therefore their resources and
capabilities constitute a key determinant of their success.
Activities of the enterprises studied demonstrate a reinvention of themselves through a change
manifested by a “shift towards immaterial and experiential stimulation” (Jensen, 2007, p. 212) as
opposed to previous trends that prioritised more the utilitarian qualities of outputs. Clearly, the two
cases have showed examples of how resources are identified and utilised to create experience for
consumers based on their managers’ capabilities.
In specific terms, for instance, the Thy
Bondegårdsferie & Gårdsbutik case study illustrates the capability of the business owner to
identify assets on his farm and municipality and reconfigure them into objects aimed at providing
experiences for visitors seeking the rural idyll. Similarly, the brewery capitalises on experiences
which are embedded in storytelling and visitor tour events.
Although stories identified in the two cases convey messages that connote experiential learning,
inferences pertaining to the conventions theory - “particular bundles of conventions” (Murdoch &
Meile, 1999, p.467) can be drawn from the contents of these stories. The findings in both cases
suggest that stories have “domestic conventions” due to their emphasis on attaching the image of
the “geographical space”- the local area to their products. In effect, consumers connect with the
quality and localness of the products. Like others, this convention is influenced by the growing
postmodernist consumers’ preferences and discernments common in affluent advanced capitalist
nations (Murdoch & Meile, 1999, p. 469-471). The connection of stories to local image/history
can also be understood better through the concept of exclusivity (Chamberlin, 1962). Although the
logic of exclusivity may be analogous to the notion of differentiation, the key emphasis on
exclusivity involves convincing the consumer that a particular product is unique in the
marketplace, and therefore a basis for generating value for enterprises in the form of monopoly
rents (Hracs et al., 2013).
Thisted is undoubtedly unique in terms of its stature, ideal and the symbolic meanings associated
with it. Hence, using these as resources to valorise products and services is indicative of exclusivity
that creates an avenue for profit making for the food related enterprises. The use of local
image/history by the enterprises as resources reinforces the OECD’s view that local assets are vital
for rural economic development as they serve as source of attraction to rural areas and ‘raw
materials for different kinds of economic activities ranging from tourism and entertainment
industries to speciality products and foods’ (OECD, 2006, p. 57). By extension, these local assets
in the Thisted municipalities have become a “set of commodifiable signs and symbols” that are
utilised by the enterprises to potentiate their quality and value (Kneafsey, 2001, p. 762). It is
71

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015
therefore indicative of how enterprises are embarking on new ways to respond to the demand for
symbolic laden products in rural contexts (Ahuja and Katila, 2004).
Pittaway et al. (2004) reaffirms the view that new ideas introduced on the market do not always
rest solely on ingenuity of individual enterprises, but increasingly, the network in which enterprises
are entrenched. The brewery’s relationship with the local tourist office and that of Thy
Bondegårdsferie & Gårdsbutik with the National Association of Agro‐Tourism attest to this as it
is seen as crucial in shaping some of their experience offerings. It also echoes Batterink et al’s.
(2010, p. 47) view that “SMEs often lack essential resources and capabilities to successfully
innovate exclusively by means of in-house activities, making inter-organisational networks
essential for SMEs that want to innovate”. This implies that network engagements of the two
enterprises had emerged out of necessity (Andreosso-O’Callaghan & Lenihan 2008) and also
suggests in principle a strategic relationship to help execute their promotional strategy (Jarillo,
1989). This gives an understanding that network capability of enterprises is vital in providing
experiences to consumers.
Drawing on the capitalist embeddedness of the experience economy, this article identifies the
brewery as not consciously operating in the experience economy as it does not consider the tour
event as a major operation to raise its turnover. This suggests a limitation to the extent to which
the brewery can maximize business opportunities in the experience economy. Nonetheless, its
storytelling experience rests on making its Pulse Guld beer competitive and also promoting the
image of Thisted to the outside world. Consequently, this, together with the tour events, has
potential to attract tourists and more customers and to enhance local development.
The actions of enterprises in the case studies put together reflects constructing value out of
previously unused rural idyllic spaces. This fits perfectly into what is defined as “the creation and
extraction of value from an environment that involves the shift in value from an existing use value
to a higher market value” (Anderson 2000, p. 103). The entrepreneurial and innovative acumen
within these enterprises can best be described as their crucial resource and capability to operate in
the experience economy, hence supporting the analytical framework that informs the study (Figure
1). Although the enterprises’ capabilities to provide various experiences based on their available
resource endowments deserves every right to be noted, Pine & Gilmore (1999) suggest that in view
of the growing competitions on the market, businesses have to create new experiences to engage
their customers. This focuses on sustainability and therefore, it raises the question: to what extent
can all these experience offerings seen in the case studies become sustainable? These enterprises
obviously have to identify new resources and employ different capabilities (depending on the
situation) to create new experiences if they seek to compete on the market for a long time.
In the light of practice, the findings of this article show that individual enterprises’ capability is a
critical requirement for creating value. This is evident from the cognitive capacities of managers
to connect local conditions such as image, history and heritage, among others, to the sale of their
mainstream products and services to create customer experiences. This has implications for
developing countries such as Ghana. As highlighted in Robson et al. (2009), historical accounts of
72

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana
entrepreneurship and small businesses show that business enterprise has been part of Ghanaian
culture prior to even the arrival of the Europeans in the 15th century. However, like in other African
countries, creating market opportunities especially in rural areas is underdeveloped. In addressing
these issues to energise competiveness, Ghanaian rural enterprises can take a cue from the activities
of their Danish counterparts reported in this article. This provides an opportunity to expand existing
markets, create new ones, increase productivity and incomes, create employment and more
importantly, attract tourists. The latter is more viable given the vast heritage resources and rich
history and stories associated with many rural areas in Ghana. However, the caveat is that rural
development policies have helped in shaping the innovative activities of rural enterprises in
Denmark. For example, the European Union and Denmark’s policy reform on rural development
encourage innovation in the food sector to animate the sector’s competitiveness and local
development (MFAF, 2012). The Danish government therefore creates the enabling environment
through various forms of assistance for innovative businesses to thrive. Hence, in adopting the
Danish example, a policy that guides the activities of rural enterprises and provides incentives is
needed in Ghana. Policy makers must also take cognisance of the cultural and environmental
differences between Ghana and Denmark. Therefore, it is imperative for the policy to be designed
or framed in a manner that will be suitable for Ghanaian rural entrepreneurs.

References
Addis, M. & Holbrook, M.B. (2001). “On the conceptual link between mass customisation and
experiential consumption: an explosion of subjectivity”. Journal of Consumer Bahaviour ,
1(1): 50-66.
Ahuja, G. and Katila, R. (2004). “Where do resources come from?: The role of idiosyncratic
situations”. Strategic Management Journal, 25: 887–907.
Amit, R. & Schoemaker, P. (1993). “Strategic assets and organizational rent”. Strategic
Management Journal, 14: 33-46.
Ampadu, R. A. (2010). “Exploring the constraints of rural enterprise development and poverty
reduction in Ghana”. ATDF Journal, 7(3/4): 15-21.
Anderson A. R. (2000). “Paradox in the periphery: an entrepreneurial reconstruction?”
Entrepreneurship and Regional Development, 12: 91-109.
Andreosso-O’Callaghan, B.
& Lenihan, H.
(2008). “Networking: a question of firm
characteristics? The case of the Shannon region in Ireland”. Entrepreneurship & Regional
Development, 20: 561-580.
Arthur, I. K. (2011). “Experience economy, innovation and traditional Industries”. Department of
Planning and Development, Aalborg University, Aalborg.

73

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015
Arthur, I.K. & Hracs, B. J. (2015). “Experience the difference: The competitive strategies of foodrelated entrepreneurs in rural Denmark”. Geografiska Annaler: Series B, Human
Geography, 97 (1): 95-112.
Baker, D., Abildtrup, J. And Hedetoft, A. (2007). Rural development policy and food industry
development: investigations of small firms in Denmark. In Petrick, M. & Buchenrieder,
G. (eds): Sustainable Rural Development: What is the Role of the Agri-food Sector? (pp.
183–199), Studies of the Agricultural and Food Sector in Central and Eastern Europe 39,
Leibnitz Institute of Agricultural Development in Central and Eastern Europe, Halle
(Saale).
Barney, J. B & W.S. Hesterly (2008). Strategic management and competitive advantage: Concepts
and cases. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Barney, J. B. (1991). “Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage”. Journal of
Management, 17(1): 99-120.
Barney, J. B., Ketchen Jr., D. J., Wright. M. (2011). “The Future of Resource-Based Theory
Revitalization or Decline?”. Journal of Management, 37(5): 1299-1315.
Batterink, H., Wubben, E. F. M., Klerkx, L., and Omta, S. W. F. O. (2010). “Orchestrating
innovation networks: The case of innovation brokers in the agri‐food sector”.
Entrepreneurship and regional development, 22(1): 47‐76.
Bille, T. (2012). “The Scandinavian approach to the experience economy – does it make sense?”
International Journal of Cultural Policy 18 (1): 93–110.
Blythe, J. (2009). Key concepts in marketing. London: Sage.
Boateng, R. (2014). Research made easy. Accra: PealRichards Foundation.
Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction – a social critique of the judgement of taste. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Capitanio, F., Coppola, A. & Pascucci, S. (2010). “Product and process innovation in the Italian
food industry”. Agriculture Economics & Resource Management, 26(4): 503-518.
Carù, A. & Cova, B. (2003). “Revisiting consumption experience: a more humble but complete
view of the concept”. Marketing Theory Articles, 3(2): 267-286.
Chamberlin, E. H. (1962). The theory of monopolistic competition: reorientation of the theory of
value. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chen, Y. (2006). ´Marketing innovation´. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 15(1):
101–123.
74

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana
Chang, T & Horng, S. (2010). “Conceptualizing and measuring experince quality: the customer's
perspective”. The Service Industries Journal, 30(14): 2401-2419.
Collis, D.J. & Montgomery. C.A. (1995). “Competing on resources: Strategy in the 1990s”,
Harvard Business Review, 73(4):118-128.
Davidsen, A. (2008). “Experiences of carrying out talking therapy in general parctice: A
qualitative interview study”, Patient education and counseling, 72: 268-275.
Day, G.S. (1994). “The capabilities of market-driven organizations”, Journal of Marketing, 52:
37-52.
Foss, N.J. (1999). Networks, capabilities, and competitive advantage, Scandinavian Journal of
Management 15:1-15.
Freire-Gibb, L. C. (2011). “The rise and fall of the concept of the experience economy in the local
economic development of Denmark”, European Planning Studies, 19(10):1839-1853.
Gentile, C., Spiller, N. & Noci. G. (2007). “How to sustain the customer experience: an overview
of experience components that co-create value with the customer”, European Management
Journal 25(5): 395-410.
Goodman, D. (2004). “Rural Europe redux? Reflections on alternative agro-food networks and
paradigm change”. Sociologia Ruralis, 44(1): 3-16.
Gilmore, J. H. & Pine, B. J. (2007). Authenticity: what consumers really want. Boston: Harvard
Business School Press.
Grant, R.M., (1991). “The Resource-Based Theory of Competitive Advantage: Implications for
Strategy Formulation”, California Management Review, 33 (3): 114–135.
Grant, R.M. (2002). Contemporary strategy analysis- Concepts, techniques, application,
Massachusetts and Oxford: Blackwell.
Harvey, D. (1990). “Between space and time: reflections on the geographical imagination”, Annals
of the Association of American Geographers, 80:418-434.
Harvey, D. (2008). “The right to the city”, New Left Review 53: 23-40.
Henderson, J. (2002). “Building the rural economy with high growth entrepreneurs”, Economic
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, (3): 45–70.
Hirschman, E. C. and M. B. Holbrook. (1982). “Hedonic consumption: emerging concepts,
methods and preposition”. Journal of Marketing 46: 92-101.

75

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015
Holbrook, M.B. (2000). “The millennial consumer in the texts of our times: Experience and
entertainment”. Journal of micromarketing 20(2):178-192.
Hracs B. J., Jakob. D., Hauge, A., (2013). “Standing out in the crowd: The rise of exclusivitybased strategies to compete in the contemporary marketplace for music and fashion”.
Environment and Planning A, 45(5): 1144 – 1161
Hyett, N., Kenny, A. & Dickson-Swift, V. (2014). “Methodology or method? A critical review of
qualitative case study reports”. International Journal of Qualitative Studies on Health
Well-being, 9: 23606
Jarillo, J. C. (1989). “Entrepreneurship and growth: The strategic use of external resources”.
Journal of Business Venturing, 4:133-147.
Jensen, O.B. (2007). “Culture stories: Understanding cultural urban branding”, Planning Theory,
6(3): 211-236.
Kneafsey, M., (2001). “Rural cultural economy: tourism and social relations”. Annals of Tourism
Research, 28(3): 762–783.
Landsbygruppen Thy (2008). Landsbygruppen Thy samler trådene på fødevareområdet i Thy og
på Mors. URL http://www.landsbygruppenthy.dk/?p=182, (accessed 24th July 2015).
Lassen, C., C.K. Smink, & Smidt-Jensen, S. (2009). “Experience spaces, (Aero) mobilities and
environmental impacts”. European Planning Studies, 17(6): 886-903.
Leatherman, J.C. & Marcouiller, D. W. (1996). “Income distribution characteristics of rural
economic sectors: implications for local development policy”. Growth and Change, 27:
434-459.
Lorentzen, A. (2005). “Strategies of learning in the process of transformation”. European Planning
Studies, 13(7): 1013-1033.
Lorentzen, A. (2009). “Cities in the experience economy”. European Planning Studies, 8(6): 829845.
Marsden, T.K. (1999). “Rural futures: regulating the consumption countryside”, Sociologia
Ruralis, 39 (4), 501 – 521.
MFAF (2012). The Danish Rural Development Programme 2007– 2013, Ministry of Food,
Agriculture
and
Fisheries,
Copenhagen.
URL:
http://naturerhverv.dk/fileadmin/user_upload/NaturErhverv/Filer/Tilskud/Projekttilskud
/Landdistrikter/LDP_Rev_proposal_Consolid_2007-2013f.pdf (accessed 31st December
2014).

76

Exploring the resource and capabilities of food related enterprises in rural Denmark:
Implications for rural enterprises in Ghana
Murdoch, J & Miele, M. (1999). “ 'Back to nature': changing 'worlds of production' in the food
sector”, Sociologia Ruralis, 39: 465-483.
Nagler, P. & Naudé, W. (2015). “Counting Africa’s Rural Entrepreneurs”. The World Bank
Group. URL:
http://blogs.worldbank.org/africacan/countingafricasruralentrepreneurs
th
(accessed on 18 October 2015).
North Denmark Region (2008) Regional Development Plan 2007, Abridged version. North
Denmark Region, Aalborg. URRL: http://www.rn.dk/Regional-Udvikling/Strategier-ogplaner/RUP/RUP2007/~/media/Rn_dk/Regional%20Udvikling/Regional%20Udvikling%
20sektion/Strategier%20og%20planer/RUP/RUP2007/Regional%20Udviklingsplan%20-%
20engelsk%202007.ashx (accessed on 27th October 2015).
Oh, H., Fiore, A. & Jeoung, M. (2007) “Measuring experience economy concepts: tourism
applications”, Journal of Travel Research, 46 (2): 119-132.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2006). The new rural paradigm:
policies and governance. Paris: OECD.
Penrose, E.T. 1959. The theory of the growth of the firm, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Pine II, B. J. & Gilmore, J.H. 1999. The Experience Economy: work is Theatre and Every Business
a Stage, Boston: Harvard Business School.
Pittaway, L., Robertson, M., Munir, K., Denyer, D., and Neely, A. (2004). “Networking and
innovation: a systematic review of the evidence”. International Journal of Management
Reviews, 5‐6(3‐4): 137‐168.
Poulsson, S. H. G. And Kale, S. H. (2004). “The experience economy and commercial
experiences”, Marketing Review, 4 (3): 267–277.
Prahalad C.K. & Ramaswamy, V. (2004) “Co-creation experience: The next practice in value
creation”, Journal of Interactive Marketing 18 (3): 5-14.
Ray, C. (1998) “Culture, intellectual property and territorial rural development”, Sociologia
Ruralis 38, 3-20.
Richards, G. (2001) “The experience industry and the creation of attractions”, in G. Richards (ed)
Cultural attractions and european tourist, Cambridge, MA: CABI Publishing, 55-69.
Robson,P. J. A., Haugh, H. M. & Obeng, A. B. (2009). “Entrepreneurship and Innovation in
Ghana: Enterprising Africa”, Small Business Economics, 32(3): 331-350.
Schmitt, B. (1999) “Experiential marketing”, Journal of Marketing Management 15 (1-3): 53-67.

77

Ghana Journal of Geography Vol. 7(2), 2015
Scott, A. (2010) “The cultural economy of landscape and prospects for peripheral development in
the twenty-first century: the case of the English Lake District”, European Planning Studies
18 (10), 1567 - 1589.
Smidt-Jensen, S., C.B. Skytt, and L. Winther. 2009. The geography of the experience economy in
Denmark: Employment change and location dynamics in attendance-based experience
industries, European Planning Studies 17, no. 6: 847-862.
Sørensen, F., Fuglsang, L. & Sundbo, J. (2010) “Experience economy, creative class and business
development in small Danish towns”, Urban Research & Practice 3(2), 177-202.
Sundbo, J. (2009) Innovation in the experience economy: A taxonomy of innovation
Sundbo, J. & Darmer, P. (eds) (2008) Creating Experience in the experience economy. Edward
Elgar, Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA.
Thisted Kommune (2015). Fakta om kommunen, Thisted Kommune, Thisted. Available online at:
http://www.thisted.dk/OmKommunen/Fakta/KommuneTal.aspx (accessed 24th August
2015)
Thorne, S. (2000). Data Analysis in qualitative research. Evidence-Based Nursing , 3: 68-70.
Toffler, A. (1970) Future Shock. Nee York: Random House.Richards, G. ed. 2001. Cultural
Attractions and European Tourism. Cambridge, MA: CABI.
Vepsäläinen, M. & Pitkänen, K. (2010). “Second home countryside. Representations of the rural
in Finnish popular discourses”. Journal of Rural Studies, 26:194–204.
von Hippel, E. (2005) Democratizing innovation. Cambridge, MA and London: The MIT Press.
Wernefelt, B. (1984) “A resource-based view of the firm”, Strategic Management Journal 5: 171180.
Williams, A. (2006) “Tourism and hospitality management: fantasy, feeling and fun”, International
Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management 8(6), 427-436.
Wright, P. M., Dunford, B. B. & Snell, S. A. (2001) “Human resources and the resource based
view of the firm”, Journal of Management 27, 701–721.

78

