Africa Journal of Management

ISSN: 2332-2373 (Print) 2332-2381 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rajm20

The influence of business schools on the ethical
behavior of students: A study from Ghana
Obi Berko Obeng Damoah & Emmanuel Wiredu Appiah
To cite this article: Obi Berko Obeng Damoah & Emmanuel Wiredu Appiah (2019): The influence
of business schools on the ethical behavior of students: A study from Ghana, Africa Journal of
Management, DOI: 10.1080/23322373.2019.1616991
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/23322373.2019.1616991

Published online: 08 Jul 2019.

Submit your article to this journal

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rajm20

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT
https://doi.org/10.1080/23322373.2019.1616991

The inﬂuence of business schools on the ethical behavior
of students: A study from Ghana
Obi Berko Obeng Damoah and Emmanuel Wiredu Appiah
University of Ghana Business School, P. O. Box LG 78, Legon, Accra, Ghana, West Africa
ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Business schools are key actors in the education of the future
managers of corporate bodies. The incessant business scandals
and negative environmental impact by businesses across the
world are exposing business school shortcomings. To instill the
beneﬁts of ethical practices at the individual, corporate, national
and global level in the next generation of managers, business
schools are being encouraged to purposefully incorporate
business ethics education as a key component of responsible
management education in their practices. This study examines the
inﬂuence of business schools on students’ ethical behavior.
The study employs structural equation modeling to validate the
hypotheses developed from the literature review. Using empirical
data from Ghana, the results ﬁrstly show that compared to
business schools with public ownership, those with private
ownership impact more positively on students’ ethical behavior.
Secondly, is found that business schools which have an aﬃliation
status with bigger business schools impact positively on students’
ethical behavior. Lastly, the ﬁndings show that teaching of
business ethics in business schools, whether as a core course or
an elective, has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ethical behavior of
students. Implications of the ﬁndings on responsible management
education, policy and practice are suggested.

Received 31 August 2018
Accepted 7 May 2019
RESPOSIBLE EDITOR

Judy Muthuri
KEYWORDS

Ethics education; Ghana;
business schools; ethical
behavior

Introduction
Across the world, business schools are being challenged to develop and build the ethical
understanding and conduct of their students because business ethics education, which is
the focus of this paper, is one of the associated subjects of Responsible Management
Education (RME). Established in 2007 and coordinated by the United Nations, interest in
RME gained popularity after the ﬁnancial crises in 2007 and 2008 (Forray & Leigh, 2012).
RME is a worldwide initiative and intervention which aims to augment and extend Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and sustainability in delivering management education
(Forray & Leigh, 2012). Diﬀerent authors present RME diﬀerently (Waddock, Rasche,
Werhane, & Unruh, 2011). For instance, according to Rasche and Gilbert (2015) and Godemann, Herzig, Moon, and Powell (2011), RME is an intervention which seeks to ensure that
the social impacts of businesses on humanity, the eﬀorts of businesses towards the
CONTACT Obi Berko Obeng Damoah
obiberko@google.com
© 2019 Africa Academy of Management
Africa Journal of Management is co-published by NISC Pty (Ltd) and Informa Limited (trading as Taylor & Francis Group)

2

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

sustainability of the universe and the reﬂection of ethical behavior in business dealings are
incorporated in the educational practices of business schools. Implicitly, RME aims to overhaul the management of business schools by positively inﬂuencing their curriculum,
research practices, teaching and learning, extracurricular and organizational activities
using its core principles (Rasche & Gilbert, 2015). Following Beddewela, Warin, Hesselden,
and Coslet (2017, p. 264), RME is deﬁned as “any teaching, research or enterprise activities
in the areas of ethics, sustainability and responsible corporate practices, which business
schools engage in to develop a more responsible strategic focus”. This deﬁnition
conﬁrms that RME is associated with ethics, sustainability and responsible corporate practice. In analyzing its intellectual roots, Forray and Leigh (2012, p. 296) maintained “RME
would not have been possible were it not for the conceptual roots provided by prior scholarship in business ethics, CSR and sustainability”. Researchers (e.g. Acevedo & Johnson,
2013; Beddewela et al., 2017; Matten & Moon, 2004; Matten & Moon, 2008) conﬁrm that
RME is associated with similar themes such as Education for Sustainability Development
(ESD), Business Ethics Education, Sustainable Development and Corporate Social Responsibility. Following Beddewela et al. (2017), ESD focuses on the need to redirect business
education in the light of the broader sustainable development challenges confronting
the global economy. According to UNESCO (2010), ESD is an intervention that seeks to
incorporate the tenets and ideals of sustainable development practices into all dimensions
of management education (e.g. teaching, learning and research) in order to tackle environmental, ethical and economic problems of the universe now and beyond.
The UN developed six (6) principles for RME to guide the management of business
schools both in their core practices and extracurricular activities. According to Waddock
et al. (2011) and Godemann et al. (2011), the six (6) principles were disclosed at the UN
Global Compact Leaders’ Summit in 2007 and consist of: purpose (e.g. turning the
future managers of business schools into sustainable and ethically minded individuals);
values (e.g. incorporating sustainability and an ethical mindset into teaching, learning
and research practice in business schools); method (e.g. linking the intended purpose
and values to materials and approaches that align the other four principles); research
(e.g. using the RME to drive research in business schools); partnership (e.g. connecting
with corporate bodies to advance the tenets of RME and making sure RME is practically
based); and dialogue (e.g. facilitating discussions and the debates of RME among all stakeholders) (see Forray & Leigh, 2012, p. 297; Godemann et al., 2011, p. 10).
The role of business schools in the implementation and realization of the tenets of RME
is seen as critical. This reason is that the creation of RME came about as a result of the
urgency to reform business education by the leaders of the UN Global Compact (Forray
& Leigh, 2012). The argument is that business schools whose activities directly drive the
behaviors of businesses cannot be disassociated from the success of any intervention
that aims to inﬂuence the practices of businesses towards sustainability and responsible
business practices. Unethical corporate practices (e.g. weak internal controls and human
rights abuse) which have rocked the business world for over a decade and a half to
date, and continue to do so, are being blamed in part on business schools (Maritz,
2010; Trank & Rynes, 2003). These researchers contend that the corporate leaders who
are connected with the global corporate scandals are produced by business schools
and hence business schools are accountable for the on-going global corporate collapses.
Most importantly, the ﬁnancial crises in 2007 and 2008 caused business schools to be

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

3

accused of not inculcating their students, who turn out to be business executives, with
ethical values (Beddewela et al., 2017). In line with this accusation, researchers (e.g.
Matten & Moon, 2004; Rasche & Gilbert, 2015) found empirical evidence to suggest that
most UK business schools are deﬁcient in their emphasis of business ethics, sustainability
and responsible business.
For example, in an empirical study, the British Sky Broadcasting Group found that out of
70% of graduate trainees in UK working in business related disciplines while agreeing that
sustainability was critical to business practices, only 35% said that they had received adequate training in ethics, sustainability and social responsibility (British Sky Broadcasting
Group, 2012). A review of the top 50 business schools worldwide found that curricula in
business schools does not place much emphasis on ethics education (Christensen,
Peirce, Hartman, Hoﬀman, & Carrier, 2007). There is much emphasis on academic excellence and corporate eﬃciency in business schools and so the degree of moral awareness
and ethical appreciation of students in these schools is argued to be low (Gioia & Corley,
2002). Yet it is expected of present-day students from business schools to develop their
professional skills alongside ethics, social responsibility and sustainability because the
world of work is fast gravitating towards skills and competencies which relate to the aforementioned theme (Beddewela et al., 2017). Business schools play a crucial role in ethics
education because they have the power to aﬀect the mind-sets and behavior of some
leading and most powerful business institutions on earth due to the training they oﬀer
to the future generation of business leaders in these corporations (Carole, 2017).
However, one of the debates in ethics education whose empirical front still remains
divided is whether or not ethical behavior can be taught, learnt and practiced in business
schools (Ryan & Bisson, 2011). Some researchers (e.g. Lund Dean & Beggs, 2006) have
argued that the mere teaching of business ethics involving the creation of ethical awareness, including the consequences of unethical behavior, has a minimal eﬀect on students’
ethical behavior. It is argued that the character of professional adults has always already
been formed in early childhood stages. Thus, although studying business ethics provides
intellectual development in terms of knowledge, that cannot change the behavior of
adults in professional practice when faced with ethical dilemmas (Hooker, 2003;
Rossouw, 2002). Some scholars in this line of thinking argue that doubts surround the
eﬀectiveness of business education which aims at improving the ethical awareness of students (Ferguson, Collison, Power, & Stevenson, 2011). In an empirical study by Low, Davey,
and Hooper (2008), the authors did not ﬁnd evidence to conclude that the perception of
students in ethics education aﬀected their ethical behavior signiﬁcantly. Dearman and
Beard (2009) found evidence to suggest that ethics behavior orientation in an experiment
does not show that the participants will behave similarly if they face real-life ethical dilemmas. Using a meta-analysis based on 25 business ethics instructional programs, Waples,
Antes, Murphy, Connelly, and Mumford (2009) concluded that business ethics instructional
principles have a minimal impact on students’ ethical behavior (i.e. the power to make the
right moral decision in the face of ethical dilemma).
Conversely, in a study that examined the perception among university lecturers in Pakistan regarding teaching business ethics to graduates, Ali, Grigore, and Ahmad (2012)
found strong interest among the university lecturers to include business ethics in the curriculum of business-related subjects. Caldwell, (2009) concurred with this latter line of theorizing and argued that ethics education inculcates a certain inner set of values (patience,

4

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

empathy, etc.) in the personality of a person, forming his or her identity in professional life.
Following Carroll and Buchholtz (2012) and Floyd, Xu, Atkins, and Caldwell (2013), while
ethical decision-making is seen as a mental process inﬂuenced by a combination of
factors, equipping business students with the principles, theories and concepts of
ethical decision-making is nonetheless being embraced as one of the key ingredients in
educating business students to embrace the moral and ethical duties which businesses
owe to society. According to Hosmer (1995), learning and understanding key concepts
in business ethics, including its normative implications, are an essential part in business
ethics education which makes business students recognize ethical dilemma, and aware
of appropriate ethical decisions and ethical outcomes. Fulmer (2001) shares this line of
thinking and maintains that teaching the assumptions of ethical decision-making theories,
values, principles and concepts contain signiﬁcant practical value for both current and
future business practitioners and therefore serves as a framework for ethical decisions
in professional practice (Fulmer, 2001). In the view of Dellaportas, Cooper, and Leung
(2006) and East and Donnelly (2012), ethical behavior of students has the potential to
induce eﬀective managerial ethical behavior. According to Edelman (2011), the reason
is that business ethics provide an essential and dynamic foundation for students developing their business careers. Other researchers have argued that running ethics courses
either as standalone subjects or the elective modules approaches are key approaches to
strengthen the implementations of RME in business schools (Matten & Moon, 2004).
Matten and Moon (2004) further prescribed an interdisciplinary approach which ensures
that RME is integrated into all traditional business management courses (e.g. ﬁnance,
accounting, marketing and human resource management). Louw (2015) attests that the
elective module (e.g. business ethics) and/or the subject approach as a way of emphasizing RME in business schools remain a dominant approach in most business schools across
the world.
The current paper builds on the latter line of research and argues that even though
ethical behavior of students is inﬂuenced by a combination of factors, yet the inﬂuence
of a business school (e.g. its size, ownership, the teaching of business ethics courses,
etc.) does impact positively on the ethical behavior of its students in their professional
lives. In this way, the paper seeks to make a contribution to the extant empirical literature
in the ﬁeld. In particular, it seeks to add to the extant empirical literature regarding ethics
education as one of the core components of RME. The paper also seeks to contribute to
the degree of implementation of RMEs from an ethics education viewpoint using an
under-studied and a new geographical context, Ghana. The context of Ghana stands to
oﬀer much to the RME research ﬁeld in African business schools and other developing
countries. This is because although Ghana is not yet one of the BRICS group of countries,
like South Africa, yet it is seen as one of the fastest growing economies of Africa and is
consistently coded as the example of Africa’s democratic and socioeconomic development and so its positive characteristics have a positive spillover eﬀect to similar countries
in Africa and other developing countries.
Furthermore, unlike researchers who focused on the inﬂuence of ethics education on the
behavior of accounting students in business schools (e.g. Nsor-Ambala & Onumah, 2015;
Simpson, 2016), the current study addresses the broader students of business schools
who do not only consist of accountancy students, but other programs (e.g. marketing,
human resource, ﬁnance, insurance and management information studies). In so doing,

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

5

the paper seeks to enhance our understanding with regard to ethics education, a key component of RME in business schools as a whole as opposed to selected options (e.g. accountancy or ﬁnance students). This study will also reduce the dearth of knowledge of ethics and
management education in the African context as has been called for by researchers (e.g.
Oredein & Durojaye, 2012; Nkomo, 2015; Olibie, Agu, and Uzoechina, 2015).
To achieve the objective of this paper, the rest of the study is structured as follows. The
next section provides a literature review on the development of the hypotheses. The
section thereafter looks at the methodology and results, followed by the discussion and
conclusions. The ﬁnal section looks at the implications of the study.

Literature Review
As indicated in the introductory section, the objective of the paper is to examine one of the
components of RME (i.e. ethics education) to explore the extent to which business schools
are able to inﬂuence the ethical behavior of their students through ethics education in line
with RME. The following four concepts, as core to the topic, are deﬁned, clariﬁed, and integrated to inform the study: business ethics, education, ethics education and ethical
behavior.

Business Ethics
The foundations of business ethics are inﬂuenced by the argument that business and
society cannot be separated. This is in terms of the stake that society has in business
and vice versa (Carroll & Buchholtz, 2008). According to Wood (1991), business and
society are intertwined rather than diﬀerent entities. Following Christensen et al. (2007,
p. 348) business ethics is deﬁned as “the business corporation’s ethical role in society
and its role in minimizing the destruction to, and maximizing the preservation of resources
for future generations”. This implies that business ethics requires corporate bodies to
conduct business in a responsible manner because they owe it a duty to society and
the future generation to preserve natural resources for future consumption. Business
ethics are the moral principles applicable to all areas of the business environment, both
at the individual and the organizational level (Ali et al., 2012). Implicitly, business ethics
is the application of morality in all business situations. Samples of business situations
where ethics are brought to bear include, but are not limited to, the relationship
between business entities and their employees, regulators, suppliers, competitors, consumers, communities and civil society. Imbedded in business ethics is its theories (e.g. ethics
of duty), principles, concepts and values (fairness, virtue, responsibility, conﬂict of interest).
The basic assumption is that upholding the tenets and practice of business ethics will
create sustainability in the world.

Education
Education is broadly acknowledged as one of the means that maximizes human potential.
According to Gülcan (2015), education can be any activity that aﬀects the mind, character,
physical disposition and ability of an individual. Its processes involve learning and acquiring information (i.e. teaching and learning). Following from this deﬁnition, by the trade

6

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

and core mandate, business schools as part of institutions of higher education have a stake
in the mental development of both current and future business executives.

Business Ethics Education
Researchers (e.g. Carroll and Buchholtz, 2012; 2013 Fulmer 2001; East and Donnelly 2012;
Edelman 2011; Schimmel et al., 2013) maintain that business ethics education can be
described as the promotion of the teaching and learning of the principles, theories and concepts of business ethics by business schools across the world to business students who
become current and future corporate executives. A number of prescriptions have been
put forward regarding how to teach and educate business students with the values of
ethics. These prescriptions include, but are not limited to, ethics as a standalone subject
or as an elective module (Louw, 2015; Matten & Moon, 2004). Others include the interdisciplinary approach which integrates business ethics into all traditional business management
courses (e.g. ﬁnance, accounting, and marketing) Matten and Moon (2004). Hosmer (1995)
states that learning and understanding key concepts in business ethics and its normative
implications is an essential part of business ethics education because it makes business students recognize ethical dilemmas, and aware of strategies of ethical decision-making and
ethical outcomes. According to Fulmer (2001), teaching the assumptions of ethical
decision-making theories, values, principles and concepts contain signiﬁcant practical
value for both current and future business practitioners and serves as a framework for
ethical business decisions. Ethics education is any teaching and learning which speciﬁcally
focuses on providing students with awareness of what is right and wrong and the capacity
to make ethical decisions regarding ethical issues in their professional lives; ethics education
is the formal study of moral conduct in personal and professional life (Gülcan, 2015).

Ethical Behavior
Ethical behavior is seen as the ethical actions which individuals, groups and organizations
initiate upon facing an ethical dilemma. Ethical actions include, but are not limited to,
honesty, conﬁdentiality, fairness avoidance of conﬂict of interest and responsibility
(Gülcan 2015). Following Sims (1991), ethical behavior also includes the following: ethics
capital (namely the enhanced ability to recognize moral issues in world of work), increased
ability in moral reasoning and enhanced aspirations to moral uprightness in life and the
world of work. Consequently, ethical behavior can be argued as the outcome of individual,
group and/or organization’s ethical decisions, based on their moral abilities in the face of
unethical issues. Therefore, ethical behavior is when people and organizations are able to
thrive through ethical dilemmas using ethical solutions (e.g. avoidance of conﬂict of interest or honesty) (Hannah, Avolio, & Walumbwa 2011).

Empirical Literature and Hypotheses Development
Ownership of Business Schools
The ownership of an organization reﬂects its resource capacity to initiate key actions to
generate required organizational outcomes. In relating ownership, business schools and
the ethical behavior of students, ownership reﬂects whether or not a business school is

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

7

privately owned or publicly owned. An argument in the literature is that publicly owned
business schools, because their original “not-for-proﬁt” mandate, are more likely to
enhance the ethical orientation of their students than privately business schools which
are primarily established as “for-proﬁt”. In line with this thinking, it was found that
public sector ownership universities tend to be more ethical than private ownership universities. Conversely, some researchers (e.g. Broni, 2009; Velentzas & Broni, 2010) are of the
view that privately owned institutions have a reputation to protect and are able to ensure
that the students they produce are ethically sound. Private institutions thus take the
responsibility to remain ethical in order to be more competitive. The present study
extends the latter line of research and poses the following hypothesis.
H1: Privately owned business schools will have a more signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on students’
ethical behavior than non-privately owned business schools.

The Teaching of Business Ethics
Whether teaching business ethics (principles, values, theories and concepts) in business
schools inﬂuences the ethical behavior of students is one of the debates in the ﬁeld
whose empirical front is still inconclusive. Rutherford, Parks, Cavazos, and White (2012)
and Whitla (2011) indicate that teaching business ethics does not oﬀer any impact on
the ethical behavior of students. According to these researchers, moral decisions are
based on personality and a person’s upbringing before entering a business school and
so a mere participating in learning and education in business ethics cannot inﬂuence a student’s ethical behavior in the world of work. Using a survey based on 229 university students, Cox, Parkison, and Roden (2009) investigated whether business students are more
discriminatory in their ethical decision-making than non-business students. In this study,
the researchers sought to examine if students with business majors act more ethically
than non-business majors. They concluded that in some instances the business major students behaved highly ethically compared to the non-business major students and less
ethically in other instances. In this study, the authors found that the business major students were highly discriminatory as result of the perceived costs and the associated
beneﬁts of ethical behavior. They concluded that the curricula of business schools that
address the need to act ethically because it is the best thing to do can be ineﬀective.
As argued above, despite the argument to the contrary, this study builds on researchers
(e.g. Edelman, 2011; Fulmer, 2001; Louw, 2015; Matten & Moon, 2004; Schimmel et al.,
2013) who argue that there is a signiﬁcant positive relationship between teaching business
ethics and students’ ethical behavior. For example, in O’Leary’s (2009) study aimed at
assessing the beneﬁt of teaching ethics to ﬁnal year accountancy students in Australia’s
educational sector, it was found that ethical instruction can positively impact the ethical
attitude of accountancy students. Sleeper, Schneider, Weber, and Weber (2006) found
that students are strongly in favor of ethics as part of business school curricula. It has
also been identiﬁed that business students see ethical responsibility as essential to the
success of university education. Discussing the relevance of business ethics, Gülcan,
(2015) found that ethics education helps students to become more civil human beings.
In another study, Paudel (2010) found that business ethics improves ethical decisionmaking by providing managers with the appropriate knowledge and tools that allow
them to correctly identify, diagnose, analyze, and provide solutions to ethical problems

8

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

and dilemmas on the job. The outcome of ethics education concerns the consequences of
ethics education on students in business schools. Dearman and Beard (2009) found that
ethics education conditions students to behave ethically when they are faced with reallife ethical situations. Waples et al. (2009) found that ethics education raises students’
awareness of moral issues in business. In line with the extant empirical ﬁndings reviewed
in this study, the study concurs that teaching business ethics will aﬀect students’ ethical
behavior in a positive way despite the present divisions in the empirical front. Therefore,
the following hypothesis is stated for empirical validation.
H2: Business schools that teach ethics as a core course will more signiﬁcantly aﬀect students’
ethical behavior positively than those that teach it as an elective.

Religious Status of a Business School
The positive eﬀect of religion on ethical behavior of individuals, groups and organizations
has been reported in the literature. It has been argued that a relationship with God based
on an experience found in religion oﬀers a key opportunity to impact one’s ethical behavior (Kohlberg, 1981). For example, it has been shown that a relationship with God inﬂuences the extent to which students cheat and also impacts other broader ethical issues
(Allmon, Page, & Rpberts, 2000; Siu, Dickinson, & Lee, 2000). It is also maintained that
the major religions possess universal ethical and moral laws which include the Ten Commandment as upheld in Christianity, Islam and Judaism, as well as most traditions in the
Holy Bible that oﬀer directional and instructive moral guidance (Ali, Camp, & Gibbs, 2000).
Also, as espoused by Conroy and Emerson (2004, p. 384) “believers in God are less willing
to act unethically because they fear that an omniscient God will catch them in the act or by
extension know their unethical thoughts or attitudes”. Consequently, individuals and institutions whose status are imbedded in religion will have a high ethical orientation which
will impact on their stakeholders (e.g. students in the case of universities). Kaminer
(1997) argued that religion is essential to virtue and contends that it is not surprising to
ﬁnd that a person or institution’s strong faith in a Supreme Being serves as a solution to
social vices such as drug abuse, teenage pregnancy and other social ills. It is thus
argued that there is a relationship between religion and the ethical values of persons. It
is also argued, however, that the importance of religion does not also mean that non-religious people have no moral values. As pointed out by Hauser (2006), when it comes to
ethical dilemmas, those with and without religious background show no diﬀerence in
their ethical behaviors. Yet, drawing from the positive eﬀect of religious aﬃliation from
the studies above, it is intuitively appealing to argue that faith-based schools will
impact more positively on the moral behavior of their students than non-faith-based
schools. Against this background, the following hypothesis is stated:
H3: Faith-based business schools will have a more signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on ethical behaviors of students than non-faith-based business schools.

Aﬃliation Status of a Business School
Studies have indicated that aﬃliation status may or may not have any impact on the
ethical behavior of students. It is suggested that regulation or not being an autonomous
institution, but an aﬃliate of a bigger parent university is one factor that inﬂuences

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

9

universities’ choice to integrate ethics into their programs. The intuitive argument is that
the aﬃliated institution will always want to behave ethically in order not to tarnish the
reputation of the parent university. Yet, Rutherford et al. (2012) contend that being
aﬃliated to a parent institution has no bearing on the ethical behavior of the aﬃliated
institutions and its stakeholders (including students). Nonetheless, it is plausible to
argue that universities that are aﬃliated to bigger and parent universities will be more cautious and avoid doing things that tarnish the image of the parent university and so will act
more ethically which will also impact their students’ ethical behavior. From this argument,
the following hypothesis is stated:
H4: Aﬃliated business schools will have a more signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on ethical behaviors
of students than non-aﬃliated business schools.

The Size of a Business School
The size of an institution is an important control variable in analyzing its outcomes (e.g. the
ethical behavior of students in business schools). The reason is that size inﬂuences the
capacity of an institution to deliver diﬀerent results and outputs. Consequently, smaller
institutions may face lower capacity to create the requisite outputs to address the concerns of their stakeholders. In addition, larger institutions are subject to more pressure
to respond to stakeholder demands (Gallo & Christensen, 2011). Some studies measured
size by the number of employees (Torugsa, O’Donohue, & Hecker, 2012) or total assets (Crisóstomo et al., 2011), but this study uses the number of employee as the measure of institutional size. Therefore, drawing from the theoretical assumptions from size literature, it is
hypothesized in this study that large business schools, because of their large resource
capacity, will seem more organized in terms faculty and resources than small large
business schools, thereby inﬂuencing the ethical behavior of their students positively.
So, hypothesis 5 is stated as follows.
H5: Compared to small business schools, large business schools will have a signiﬁcant positive
eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students.

Faculty Inﬂuence
It is inferred that the relationship of faculty and students will inﬂuence the ethical behavior
of students. However, the empirical position of this assertion is also dividend (McDonald &
Carroll, 2006). Brint, Riddle, Turk-Bicakci and Levy (2005) discovered that faculty does not
necessarily have any inﬂuence on the ethical behavior of students because the characters
of students have already formed before they entered the university. As a result, faculty can
only advise, but the ﬁnal decision lies with students. Conversely, other researchers hold the
view that faculty plays a signiﬁcant role in developing students’ ethical behavior, through
even their mere interactions with students (Kuh, Kinzie, Schuh, & Whitt, 2005). It is conceivable to argue that because students directly or indirectly look up to their lecturers, the
inﬂuence of lecturers can shape the ethical behavior or the otherwise of students.
Against this background, the following hypothesis is posited:
H6: Faculty inﬂuence will have a signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students.

10

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

Control Variables
It is argued that the gender of a student (Yu & Zhang, 2006), their age (Loe, Ferrell, &
Mansﬁeld, 2000), their educational background, and their personality traits will aﬀect
their ethical behavior and so these variables are controlled for in the study.
Conceptual Framework
The conceptual framework that drive the analysis in this study is based on the empirical
review above. Therefore, the dependent variable, ethical behavior, and the six hypotheses
discussed above form the basis of the empirical analysis of the study. The conceptual framework for this study is presented in Figure 1.

Methodology
This paper adopts the survey research method approach in understanding the issues by
employing structural equation modeling (SEM) to test the hypotheses which inform the
study. The motivation is that SEM analysis has been found to improve a regression’s parameter estimates compared to ordinary least square (OLS).
The population of the study consisted of all business schools in Ghana, focusing on
their ﬁnal year students. The study was limited to ﬁnal year students because it was
assumed that if a business school has inﬂuenced a student’s ethical behavior, then
ﬁnal year students would tell a better story than their colleagues in the lower levels.
In terms of sample size, this study distributed ﬁve hundred (500) questionnaires to the
ten (10) selected accredited business schools in Ghana as the target population.
Three-hundred and seventy-nine (379) valid questionnaires were retrieved and used
for the analysis. This represents a response rate of 75.8%. Purposive and convenience
sampling was used to select participating schools for inclusion in the study. Purposive
sampling assisted the researcher to select ten (10) universities based on the following

Figure 1. Proposed conceptual framework.

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

11

criteria: (i) the business school was properly accredited; (ii) the business school has ﬁnal
year students (meaning new business schools in Ghana which had just started and did
not have ﬁnal year students were excluded from the study); (iii) the business school was
a wholly Ghanaian owned; and (iv) the school was willingly to participate in the study
voluntarily.
A survey questionnaire was used as the data collection method. Table 1 presents the
operationalization of the variables in terms of the scales and the source of references.
Table 2 outlines the description of the business schools sampled.

Validity and Reliability of Instruments
Consistent with scale development and puriﬁcation procedures, the construct validity of
the measurement items was assured through exploratory factor analysis (EFA) and conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA). The EFA was used to retain items that shared signiﬁcant
variance with their main variables, while CFA was used to conﬁrm their suitability for
further analysis. Reliability is an assessment of the degree of consistency between multiple measurements of a construct. The reliability scale used in this study is the Cronbach’s alpha. Struwig and Stead (2001) describe Cronbach’s alpha (Cronbach, 1951) as
a measurement of how well a set of items measure a single one-dimensional latent construct. The measure ranges from 0 to 1. A value of 1 indicates perfect reliability, and the
value below 0.70 is considered to be the lower level of acceptability (Hair, Anderson,
Tatham, & William, 1998). Therefore, a Cronbach’s alpha of at least 0.70 was deemed
acceptable in this study. In furtherance of the above, Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson, and
Tatham (2006) assert that Cronbach’s alpha may however understate reliability in
certain cases and, in addition, also increases with an increasing number of items, thus
making it an imperfect indicator of the reliability of a scale. So, additional measures of
reliability such as composite reliability generated using conﬁrmatory factor analysis
can be employed (Hair et al., 2006). This study employed composite reliability in addition
to the Cronbach’s alpha as indicators of the internal consistency of the measurement
scales.

Table 1. Operationalization of variables.
Nos

Variables

Type of variable

Nature of
variable

Measurements/
operationalization
40 item scale averaged as
a mean
10 item scale averaged as
mean
Categorical

1.

Ethical behavior

Dependent

Continuous

2.

Personality

Continuous

3.

6.

Ownership of
Business school
Ethics education of
Business school
Aﬃliation status of
Business school
Faculty inﬂuence

Control
(independent)
Independent

7.

Peer inﬂuence

4.
5.

Independent
Independent
Independent

Dummy/
discreet
Dummy/
discreet
Dummy/
discreet
Continuous

Control
Continuous
(independent)
Source: Designed by the author from the literature.

Source
Lennick Kiel (2005)

Categorical

Gosling, Rentfrow, and
Swann (2003).
Velentzas and Broni
(2010), Broni (2009)
Felton and Sims (2005)

Categorical

Hauser (2006)

5-item scale averaged

Teodorescu and Andrei
(2009)
Teodorescu and Andrei
(2009)

4-item scale a dummy/
discreet raged

12

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

Table 2. Description of the sample.
Business
Schools
University of Ghana Business School (UGBS)
University of Cape Coast (UCC)
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology (KNUST)
Wisconsin University
Methodist University
Valley View University
Pentecost University
Ashesi University
Central University
Christian Service University
Total

Number of
Students
(N)

Percentage of
Students (%)

Required
sampled size
(n)

Response
rate (%)

1 200
849
915

17%
12%
13%

64
46
49

100%
100%
100%

654
780
678
542
108
714
614
7 054

9%
11%
10%
8%
1%
10%
9%
100

35
42
36
29
6
39
33
379

100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%

Author’s own compilation.

Method of Data Analysis
The data analysis was conducted using descriptive statistics, factor analysis (FA), correlations, and structural equation modeling (SEM) based on SPSS version 22.0 and IBM
Amos version 22.0. However, before the SEM was run, the exploratory factor analysis
and conﬁrmatory factor analysis were employed. The purpose of the exploratory factor
analysis was to identify the underlying factors and to retain items that have high correlations with the variables for SEM analysis (Hair, Sarstedt, Hopkins, & Kuppelwieser,
2014; Mooi & Sarstedt, 2011). The purpose of the conﬁrmatory factory analysis was to
test whether the data ﬁt a hypothesized measurement model and structural model in
the SEM. The reason why a conﬁrmatory analysis is done after an exploratory analysis is
because it helps researchers to specify the number of factors required in the data and
which measured variable is related to which latent variable.

The Results of the Exploratory Factor Analysis
Using the SEM’s analysis, the results of the exploratory factor analysis are indicated in
Table 3 which shows that the data or the sample is suﬃcient or adequate for factor analysis. This is because the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) sampling adequacy test, Cumulative variance explained (CVE) and Bartlett’s test of Sphericity (p-value) were used in the
exploratory analysis. In the view of Hair et al. (2014), the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) test
is a measure of how suited data is for factor analysis. The test measures sampling adequacy
for each variable in the model and for the complete model (Mooi & Sarstedt, 2011). The
statistic is a measure of the proportion of variance among variables that might be
common variance. According to Henseler, Ringle, and Sinkovics (2009), the CVE must be
Table 3. Exploratory factor analysis.
Variable

CVE (%)

KMO

Bartlett’s test (p-value)

Personality
Ethical behavior
Faculty inﬂuence
Peer inﬂuence
Source: Fieldwork, 2017.

53.060
61.381
53.783
60.783

.749
.955
.763
.754

.000
.000
.000
.000

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

13

able to explain more than 50% of the variables. Bartlett’s test of sphericity (p-value) of the
data was used to ascertain the level of signiﬁcance of the variables under study (Mooi &
Sarstedt, 2011).

The Results of the Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis
After exploratory analysis, there is the need for conﬁrmatory factory analysis. Using the
SEM, results of the conﬁrmatory factor analysis are indicated in Table 4.
From Table 4, the study conducted conﬁrmatory analysis with the names of the ﬁt
indices such as CMIN/DF (χ2/df), GFI, CFI, RMSEA, and SRMR as prescribed by scholars
(Hu & Bentler, 1999; Schreiber, Nora, Stage, Barlow, & King, 2006). Columns two and
three respectively show that the threshold and current model must ensure that the
data is ﬁt for further analysis. The ﬁt indices as provided in the table reveal suﬃcient ﬁt.
The study model has a ratio of chi-square to degree of freedom CMIN/df (χ2/df) of
1.377 which is well within the threshold of 3 as recommended by Hu and Bentler
(1999). Both the incremental ﬁt measures such as GFI (0.910) and CFI (0.969) ﬁt measures,
show that the model is adequately ﬁt, suggesting that the study’s model has adequately
represented the data. The root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) of the study
model of 0.032 satisﬁed the recommended cutoﬀ point suggested by Hu and Bentler
(1999) and Hair et al. (1998). It also shows that model quality is acceptable and the
same applies to standardized root mean square residual (SRMR). Overall, Figure 2 presents
the results of the SEM.
As can be seen from Figure 2, the main latent variables in the construct PI, FI and PES
represented peer inﬂuence, faculty inﬂuence and personality respectively. Also, EB in the
construct was used to represent ethical behavior. As already explained, items that did not
load well were deleted leading to the outcome above.

Descriptive Statistics
After cleaning the data through the expectation maximization (EM) method coupled with
the EFA and CFA the data became ready for analysis. Table 5 describes the data in terms of
the categorical and the continuous variables. It presents the proﬁle of the research respondents in respect of their gender, courses pursued, religion, highest level of education and
marital status (i.e. the categorical variables).
From Table 5, the data shows that 57.0% were males while the remaining 43.0% were
females. Accounting students made up 34.6% of the sample with insurance students in the
minority. With regard to the religion, most students were Christian (94.5%). Most students

Table 4. Conﬁrmatory factor analysis.
Model ﬁt indices
CMIN/DF (χ2/df)
GFI
CFI
RMSEA
SRMR
Source: Fieldwork, 2017.

Threshold

Current model

≤3, excellent; <5, acceptable
>.95, excellent; >.90, acceptable
>.95, excellent; >.90, acceptable
< .06, excellent; .06–.10, acceptable
<.08, excellent; .08–.10, acceptable

1.377
0.910
0.969
0.032
0.043

14

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

Figure 2. The ﬁnal CFA model with standardized loadings.

fell in the age range of 23–28 years while the lowest number were above 41 years. Table 6
shows the description of the interval variables.

Results of Structural Equation Model
As indicated above, the main model to test the hypothesis was SEM. The SEM process
centers around two steps. First, it validates the measurement model in terms of assessing
the relationship between hypothetical latent constructs and clusters of observed variables
underlying each construct (Bryne, 2010). Validation of the measurement model is often
conducted by using conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA). The second step centers on
ﬁtting the structural model by measuring the signiﬁcance of the relationship between
latent variables which is often accomplished through path analysis (Kaplan, 2000). SEM
therefore, allows the use of conﬁrmatory factor analysis to reduce measurement error
by testing multiple indicators per latent variable while oﬀering superior model visualization through its graphical modeling interface (Kline, 2005). The outcome is shown in
Figure 3.
The structural model revealed suﬃcient ﬁt and adequate quality in all the most used
ﬁt indices for data ﬁtting a model. The study model has a ratio of chi-square to degree
of freedom CMIN/df (χ2/df) of 1.927 which is well within the threshold of 3 or less as
recommended by Hu and Bentler (1999). This further indicates that the study model is
suﬃciently ﬁt for the data. The incremental ﬁt measures such as GFI (0.983) and CFI
(0.983) ﬁt measures show that the model is adequately ﬁt, suggesting that the
study’s model adequately represented the data. The root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) of the study model of 0.050 satisﬁed the recommended cutoﬀ point

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

15

Table 5. Descriptive statistics of the categorical variables.
Detail

Variable

Frequency

Percentage

Cumulative

Male
Female

216
163

57.0
43.0

57.0
100

Accounting
Human resource
Marketing
Finance
Public administration
MIS
Operations and risk management
Actuarial science
Insurance
B.COM

131
118
14
66
12
4
3
17
1
13

34.6
31.1
3.7
17.4
3.2
1.1
.8
4.5
.3
3.3

34.6
65.7
69.4
86.8
90.0
91.1
91.9
96.4
96.7
100

Christianity
Islam

358
20

94.5
5.5

94.5
100

Degree on-going
Professional course
Diploma

369
6
3

97.4
1.6
.8

97.4
99.0
100

Single
Married
Divorced
Separated

359
16
1
3

94.7
4.2
.3
.8

94.7
98.9
99.2
100

18–22
23–28
29–34
35–40
41 years and above

157
198
14
6
4

41.4
52.0
3.7
1.8
1.1

41.4
93.4
97.1
98.9
100

Below 1 year
1–3 years
4–6 years
7 years and above

212
142
12
12

55.9
37.7
3.2
3.2

55.9
93.4
96.8
100

Gender
Courses

Religion of students
Highest level of education

Marital Status

Age

Work experience

Source: Fieldwork, 2017.

suggested by Hu and Bentler (1999) and Hair et al. (1998). It also shows that model
quality is acceptable and same applies to standardized root mean square residual
(SRMR). The statistical results show that ownership of a business school has a signiﬁcant
eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students (β = 0.318, p = 0.000). Also, the aﬃliation
status of school has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students (β =
0.208, p = 0.000). Additionally, the results indicate that size has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on
the ethical behavior of students though in the negative sense (β= −.246, p = 0.000).
This means that as hypothesized, small business schools have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on
Table 6. Means and standard deviations all the continuous variables.
Variable

Mean

Standard deviation

Ethical behavior
Personality
Faculty inﬂuence
Peer inﬂuence
Source: Fieldwork, 2017.

156.015
3.6539
1.598
2.076

24.9107
.59172
.7279
.9203

16

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

Figure 3. The ﬁnal structural model with standardized estimates.

student’s ethical behavior than large business schools. However, religious aﬃliation of a
business school, oﬀering ethics course either as an elective or core, and faculty
inﬂuence had no signiﬁcant relationship on the ethical behavior of students. On the
part of the controlled variables, only personality had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on students’
ethical behavior (β= .125, p = 0.000) but peer inﬂuence and gender still had no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students. Table 7, Appendix A presents the output
of the SEM.
A summary showing which of the hypotheses were supported is also presented in
Table 8.
Table 7. Summary of results of SEM.
Hypothesized relationship

Standardized estimate

C.R

S.E

OS & EBH
0.318***
4.780
2.139
EC & EBH
−.002
−.054
2.251
RS & EBH
−.006
−0.118
1.596
AS & EBH
0.208***
4.139
1.651
SZ & EBH
−.246***
−4.776
1.691
FI & EBH
.024
0.552
0.191
PI & EBH
−.014
−.323
0.189
GN & EBH
−.041
−1.083
1.215
PS & EBH
.125***
3.293
0.273
R2 (EBH = 0.45), ***signiﬁcant at 1%, **signiﬁcant at 5%.
C.R – Critical ratio (t-value), S.E – Standard error.
Note: EBH – Ethical behavior, OS – Ownership status, EC – Ethics education, RS –
Religious status, AS – Aﬃliation status, SZ – Size, FI – Faculty inﬂuence, PI – Peer
inﬂuence, GN – Gender, PS – Personality.

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

17

Table 8. Summary of results of the hypotheses.
Hypothesis
H1: Privately owned business schools will have a more signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on
students’ ethical behavior than non-privately owned business schools.
H2: Business schools that teach ethics as a core course will more signiﬁcantly aﬀect
students’ ethical behavior positively than those that teach it as an elective..
H3: Faith-based business schools will have a more signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on ethical
behaviors of students than non-faith-based business schools.
H4: Aﬃliated business schools will have a more signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on ethical
behaviors of students than non-aﬃliated business schools.
H5: Compared to small business schools, large business schools will have a signiﬁcant
positive eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students.
H6: Faculty inﬂuence will have a signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on the ethical behavior of
students.

Statistical
results

Outcome

Positive eﬀect

Supported

No eﬀect

Not
supported
Not
supported
Supported

No eﬀect
Positive eﬀect
Negative
eﬀect
No eﬀect

Supported
Not
supported

Discussion
First, the study hypothesized that with regard to the ownership of a business school, privately owned business schools would have a signiﬁcant positive eﬀect on students’ ethical
behavior compared to non-privately owned and/or public business schools. The statistical
results show that private business schools have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ethical behavior
of students thereby supporting hypothesis 1. This result contradicts the initial argument
that because of the non-for-proﬁt mandate of public business schools they will signiﬁcantly inﬂuence students’ ethical behavior. The result also counters the ﬁnding that
public sector ownership tends to be more ethical than private ownership universities.
However, the result conﬁrms researchers (e.g. Broni, 2009; Velentzas & Broni, 2010) who
found that private business schools, because of their need to improve their competitiveness, impact more highly on students’ ethical behavior than public ones. The need to strategically penetrate the higher education market and to protect their investors’ investment,
unlike the public universities who are funded by the state, makes the private universities
sensitive to needs of their stakeholder, including inﬂuencing the ethical behavior of their
students by way of building the conﬁdence of civil society.
The second hypothesis concerns the teaching of business ethics as a core course and its
inﬂuence on students’ ethical behavior. This result shows that oﬀering ethics course either
as a core or an elective has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students. The
result supports Low et al. (2008) who did not ﬁnd evidence to conclude that the perception of students in ethics education aﬀected their ethical behavior signiﬁcantly. The
ﬁnding also supports Dearman and Beard (2009) who found that ethics orientation in
an experiment do not show that the participants will behave similarly if they faced an
ethical dilemma in real life. The result too aligns with Waples et al. (2009) who concluded
that instructional principles of business ethics have a weak eﬀect on students’ ethical
behavior. However, the result challenges previous inspiring ﬁndings from researchers
who found a statistically signiﬁcant inﬂuence (e.g. Dearman & Beard, 2009; Gülcan,
2015; O’Leary, 2009; Paudel, 2010; Waples et al., 2009). This tension means that more
studies on this factor may be necessary.
Hypothesis 3 was not supported because the result shows that religious aﬃliation of a
business school has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students. The result
conﬁrms Hauser’s (2006) ﬁndings, but contradicts extant assertions on religious

18

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

assumptions (see Ali et al., 2000; Kaminer, 1997). A plausible explanation for this ﬁnding
may be that because of the changing trends in Ghana’s economic situation, coupled
with the increased cost of running institutions of higher learning, so-called faith-based
schools are all running on full cost recovery and thereby failing in their core mandate,
including instilling ethical behavior among students who are potential future managers
of corporate institutions.
Hypothesis 4 was supported because the result shows that the aﬃliation status of a
school has a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the ethical behavior of students. This is consistent
with studies in the literature review that suggest that regulation is one factor that inﬂuences institutions’ choice to behave ethically. The ﬁnding conﬁrms earlier studies which
argued that not being an autonomous business school, but an aﬃliate of a higher institution of learning is one factor that inﬂuences universities’ choice to incorporate ethics
into their curricula. This may conﬁrm the assertion that the aﬃliated institution will
always want to live up to ethically high standards so as not to tarnish the name of the
parent university.
Hypothesis 5 was also supported. The result indicates that size has a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on the ethical behavior of students, though in a negative sense, implying that small
business schools have a more signiﬁcant eﬀect on students’ ethical behavior than large
business schools. This is strongly supported by some researchers (e.g. Saarenketo, 2009;
Gallo & Christensen, 2011). These researchers are of the view that small universities are
more concerned with reputation and are prepared to go to any extent to control the
behavior of students to win the conﬁdence of the public. Moreover, small schools according to the researchers have the capacity to ensure compliance to ethical behavior due to
the numerical strength of staﬀ. Hypothesis 6 was not supported because the result shows
that faculty inﬂuence has no signiﬁcant relationship on the ethical behavior of students.
This conﬁrms previous studies such as that by Brint, Riddle, Turk-Bicakci, and Levy
(2005) who concluded that faculty do not necessarily have any inﬂuence on the ethical
behavior of students because faculty can only advise but ﬁnal decision-making lies with
students.

Conclusion
The results show that ownership of a business school, aﬃliation status to a higher parent
university and the size of business schools have signiﬁcant eﬀect on students’ ethical
behavior. On the other hand, teaching business ethics in business schools (either as a
core course or an elective), the religious status of a business school and faculty
inﬂuence do not have any signiﬁcant eﬀect on students’ ethical behavior. Among the
key reasons are that with regard to the faith-based business schools in Ghana because
of the economic situation of Ghana most of them are running on full cost recovery and
so the room to emphasis on building students’ ethical conducts as one of their primary
mandates is being sacriﬁced. Consequently, the religious title of the schools just exists
in name. The non-signiﬁcant impact on students ethical behavior through teaching
business ethics courses in business schools in Ghana might mean that there is the need
to research how others universities where signiﬁcant relationships were found do it.
Here it can be assumed that teaching approach may play important role (e.g. teaching
with cases, job visit, practitioner forum, role play and watching real videos), but currently,

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

19

these may not be available and applicable in Ghana given the universities’ stages of development compared to their counterparts abroad.

Implications of the Paper
Contribution to Empirical Literature
The study contributes to one of the heightened debates in the ﬁeld of RME regarding
whether or not business ethics’ education (being one of the key components of RME) inﬂuences students’ ethical behavior signiﬁcantly. The present results, showing that oﬀering
ethics course either as an elective or core, does not have any signiﬁcant eﬀect on the
ethical behavior of students validate a sample of the existing ﬁndings in the RME’s empirical front. This result sheds light on studies (e.g. Dearman & Beard, 2009; Low et al., 2008;
Waples et al., 2009) who did not ﬁnd evidence to support any statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect
of teaching business ethics and its eﬀects on students’ ethical behavior. The implications
of the present ﬁnding imply that further studies need to be undertaken to shed additional
light on the issue because the empirical front still remains inconclusive. As already argued,
it is more likely that the teaching methods used in the ethics education need to be considered, although these were not factored in this present study. Unlike other studies (e.g.
Nsor-Ambala & Onumah, 2015; Simpson, 2016) who limited their study to the inﬂuence of
business schools on the ethical behavior of accounting students, this study covered every
student in business schools. Consequently, this study improves on these earlier empirical
ﬁndings regarding the role of ethics education and its inﬂuence on the ethical behavior of
students in business schools, by covering all students in all options. Another contribution is
that the present empirical results add to the dearth of studies on the topic in Africa thereby
partly addressing the call by earlier researchers (e.g. Oredein & Durojaye, 2012; Nkomo,
2015; Olibie et al. 2015) to enhance the knowledge of the topic from Africa’s viewpoint.
Furthermore, the empirical validation of the topic enhances our understanding regarding
the implementation of RMEs from a new geographical and understudied African context
(i.e. Ghana). As indicated in the introductory chapter, this contribution stands out because
apart from South Africa being one of the BRICS group of countries, few papers share light
on the topic from other countries in Africa. Therefore, sharing these results in the light of
Ghana’s democratic credentials (i.e. being one of the model democratic countries in Africa)
makes it a signiﬁcant contribution to the empirical front of RME’s research ﬁeld. Also, by
employing SEM to test the hypotheses informing this study, the current empirical
ﬁndings in the ﬁeld of RME is strengthened because it is proven that SEM’s output are
far reliable than multiple regression.
Contribution to Practice
The ﬁndings in this research imply that while RME is important and universally embraced,
the methodology employed to get the tenets of RME inculcated in students must be critically examined if the purpose of RME is to be achieved. For instance, in the case of teaching business ethics, diﬀerent teaching and learning methods (e.g. cases, studies, problembased learning, work visit, simulations) may be employed both separately and collectively.
Consequently, strong relationship between parent business schools and their mentee universities (aﬃliates) must be continually be encouraged as was seen as being signiﬁcant in
the study.

20

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

Policy Implications
Concerning policy, government agencies in Africa, for example the National Accreditation
Board (NAB) in the case of Ghana should ensure that ethical issues are fully incorporated
into programs before they are granted accreditation. For instance, in most business
schools in countries of Africa (e.g. Ghana), the principles of the RME are least seen and
emphasized. As a result of its connections with social responsibility, ethical behavior
and global sustainability, the values of the RMEs must be upheld and strongly promoted
in business schools in Africa. Consequently, unveiling the personal, corporate, national and
the global beneﬁts of RME to students early on their learning stages, will make them
responsible future managers which will ultimately translate to world of work and ensure
global sustainability. Consequently, if business schools are able to achieve this objective,
the quest for a global world of social, environmental and corporate sustainability will be
achieved.
Limitations of the Study of Implications for Future Research
The above ﬁndings and recommendations should be considered in the light of the following limitations. First, the study focused solely on business schools in Ghana. Therefore,
generalizing the current ﬁndings to business schools in other developing countries
should be done with caution. Also, data were not based on a random sampling. As a
result, readers should interpret data within the conﬁnes of the study. In terms of the
opportunity for future research, the present study considers only the ethical component
of RME; therefore, future research should explore the other dimensions of the RME
namely: purpose, method, research, partnership, and dialogue (Forray & Leigh, 2012; Godemann et al., 2011).

Disclosure Statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.

Notes on the Contributors
Dr Obi Berko Obeng Damoah is a member of faculty at the University of Ghana Business School,
Legon, Accra. He teaches strategic management at both graduate and undergraduate levels and
his research focuses on strategy and international business.
Mr Emmanuel Wiredu Appiah is an M. Phil student at the University of Ghana Business School, Legon,
Accra, Ghana. Mr Wiredu’s research is in strategy, innovation and higher education management.

References
Acevedo, B., & Johnson, S. (2013). Sustainability in practice: Action learning and the green impact
initiative. Enhancing education for sustainable development case study publication. Higher
Education Academy.
Ali, A. J., Camp, R. C., & Gibbs, M. (2000). The ten commandments perspective on power and authority
in organizations. Journal of Business Ethics, 26(4), 351–361.
Ali, I., Grigore, G. F., & Ahmad, J. (2012). University teachers’ perceptions towards teaching business
ethics. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 46, 3637–3641.

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

21

Allmon, D. E., Page, D., & Rpberts, R. (2000). Determinants of perceptions of cheating: Ethical orientation, personality and demographics. Journal of Business Ethics, 23(4), 411–422.
Beddewela, E., Warin, C., Hesselden, F., & Coslet, A. (2017). Embedding responsible management education – Staﬀ, student and institutional perspectives. The International Journal of Management
Education, 15(2), 263–279.
Brint, S., Riddle, M., Turk-Bicakci, L., & Levy, C. S. (2005). From the liberal to the practical arts in
American colleges and universities: Organizational analysis and curricular change. The Journal
of Higher Education, 76(2), 151–180
British Sky Broadcasting Group (2012), The Sky Future Leaders Study: The Sustainable Generation,
British Sky Broadcasting Group, London, available at: http://www.annualreports.com/
HostedData/AnnualReportArchive/b/LSE_BSY_2009.pdf (accessed 16 May 2019).
Broni, J. (2009). Corporate Social Responsibilities. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth Pub. Co.
Bryne, B. M. (2010). Structural equation modelling with AMOS: Basic concepts, applications and programming (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group.
Caldwell, C. (2009). Identity, self-awareness, and self-deception: Ethical implications for leaders and
organizations. Journal of Business Ethics, 90(3), 393–406.
Carole, P. (2017). The principles for responsible management education (PRME): The ﬁrst decade–
What has been achieved? The next decade–Responsible Management Education’s challenge for
the sustainable development goals (SDGs). The international journal of management education,
15(2), 61–65.
Carroll, A. B., & Buchholtz, A. K. (2012). Business and society: Ethics, sustainability, and stakeholder management (8th ed.). Mason, OH: South-Western.
Carroll, A.B. & Buchholtz, A.K. (2008). Business and Society: Ethics and Stakeholder.Management.
New York: Cengage Learning.
Christensen, L. J., Peirce, E., Hartman, L. P., Hoﬀman, W. M., & Carrier, J. (2007). Ethics, CSR, and sustainability education in the Financial Times top 50 global business schools: Baseline data and
future research directions. Journal of Business Ethics, 73(4), 347–368.
Conroy, S. J., & Emerson, T. L. (2004). Business ethics and religion: Religiosity as a predictor of ethical
awareness among students. Journal of business ethics, 50(4), 383–396.
Cox, S. R., Parkison, K. A. T. H. Y., & Roden, D. M. (2009). A case for teaching business ethics in a costbeneﬁts framework: Are business students more discriminating in their decision making? Mt.
Plains J. Bus. Econ, 10, 1–15.
Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coeﬃcient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16(3), 297–
334.
Dearman, D. T., and J. E. Beard. (2009). Ethical issues in accounting and economics experimental
research: Inducing strategic misrepresentation. Ethics & Behavior, 19(1), 51–59
Dellaportas, S., Cooper, B. J., & Leung, P. (2006). Measuring moral judgement and the implications of
cooperative education and rule-based learning. Accounting & Finance, 46(1), 53–70.
East, J., & Donnelly, L. (2012). Taking responsibility for academic integrity: A collaborative teaching
and learning design. Journal of University Teaching & Learning Practice, 9(3), 2.
Edelman. (2011). 201 1 Edelman Trust Barometer. Retrieved from http://www.edelman.com/trust/
2011/
F. Hair Jr, J., Sarstedt, M., Hopkins, L., & G. Kuppelwieser, V. (2014). Partial least squares structural
equation modeling (PLS-SEM) An emerging tool in business research. European Business Review,
26(2), 106–121.
Felton, E. L., & Sims, R. R. (2005). Teaching business ethics: Targeted outputs. Journal of Business Ethics,
60(4), 377–391.
Ferguson, J., Collison, D., Power, D., & Stevenson, L. (2011). Accounting education, socialisation and
the ethics of business. Business Ethics: A European Review, 20(1), 12–29.
Floyd, L. A., Xu, F., Atkins, R., & Caldwell, C. (2013). Ethical outcomes and business ethics: Toward
improving business ethics education. Journal of business ethics, 117(4), 753–776.
Forray, J. M., & Leigh, J. S. (2012). A primer on the principles of responsible management education:
Intellectual roots and waves of change. Journal of Management Education, 36(3), 295–309.

22

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

Fulmer, R. M. (2001). Johnson & Johnson: Frameworks for leader- ship. Organizational Dynamics, 29
(3), 211–220.
Gallo, P. J., & Christensen, L. J. (2011). Firm size matters: An empirical investigation of Gambill, H.,
(2003). The role of business schools in society. Journal of Management Development, 24, 819–829.
Gioia, D. A., & Corley, K. G. (2002). Being good versus looking good: Business school rankings and the
Circean transformation from substance to image. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 1
(1), 107–120.
Godemann, J., Herzig, C., Moon, J., & Powell, A. (2011). Integrating sustainability into business schools:
Analysis of 100 UN PRME sharing information on progress (SIP) reports (ICCSR Research Paper Series
No. 58-2011). Nottingham, UK: ICCSR.
Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., & Swann Jr, W. B. (2003). A very brief measure of the Big-Five personality
domains. Journal of Research in personality, 37(6), 504–528.
Gülcan, N. Y. (2015). Discussing the importance of teaching ethics in education. Procedia – Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 174, 2622–2625.
Hair, J. F., Anderson, R. E., Tatham, R. L., & William, C. (1998). Black (1998), Multivariate data analysis.
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., Anderson, R. E., & Tatham, R. L. (2006). Multivariate data analysis.
Uppersaddle River.
Hair Jr, F. J., Sarstedt, M., Hopkins, L., & Kuppelwieser, G. V. (2014). Partial least squares structural
equation modeling (PLS-SEM) An emerging tool in business research. European Business Review,
26(2), 106–121.
Hannah, S. T., Avolio, B. J., & Walumbwa, F. O. (2011). Relationships between authentic leadership,
moral courage, and ethical and pro-social behaviors. Business Ethics Quarterly, 21(4), 555–578.
Hauser, M. (2006). Moral minds: How nature designed our universal sense of right and wrong. New York,
Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers.
Henseler, J., Ringle, C. M., & Sinkovics, R. R. (2009). The use of partial least squares path modeling in
international marketing. In New challenges to international marketing (pp. 277–319). Bingley,
Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Hooker, B. (2003). Rule consequentialism.
Hosmer, L. T. (1995). Trust: The connecting link between organizational theory and philosophical
ethics. Academy of Management Review, 20(2), 379–403.
Hu, L.-T., & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoﬀ criteria for ﬁt indexes in covariance structure analysis:
Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary
Journal, 6, 1–55. review of the inﬂuences and risk situations for health students. Higher
Education Research and Development, 32(3), 369–380.
Kaminer, W. (1997). Pro & con: Atheists can be moral too. SpeakOut.com. Retrieved from http://
speakout.com/activism/opinions/4991-1.html
Kaplan, D. (2000). Structural equation modeling: Foundations and extensions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling. New York: Guilford Press.
Kohlberg, L. (1981). Essays on moral development: The psychology of moral development (Vol. 2).
San Francisco: harper & row.
Kuh, G., Kinzie, J., Schuh, J., & Whitt, E. (2005). Student success in college: Creating conditions that
matter. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lennick, D., & Kiel, F. (2005). Linking strong moral principles to business success. Pennsylvania, Wharton
School of the University of Pennsylvania.
Loe, T. W., Ferrell, L., & Mansﬁeld, P. (2000). A review of empirical studies assessing ethical decision
making in business. Journal of business ethics, 25(3), 185–204.
Louw, J. (2015). “Paradigm change” or no real change at all? A critical reading of the UN principles for
responsible management education. Journal of Management Education, 39(2), 184–208.
Low, M., Davey, H., & Hooper, K. (2008). Accounting scandals, ethical dilemmas and educational challenges. Critical Perspectives on Accounting, 19(2), 222–254.
Lund Dean, K., & Beggs, J. M. (2006). University professors and teaching ethics: Conceptualizations
and expectations. Journal of Management Education, 30, 15–44.
Maritz, N. P. (2010). A general theory of marketing ethics. Journal of Macro marketing, 6(1), 5–16.

AFRICA JOURNAL OF MANAGEMENT

23

Matten, D., & Moon, J. (2004). Corporate social responsibility education in Europe. Journal of Business
Ethics, 54(4), 323–337.
Matten, D., & Moon, J. (2008). “Implicit” and “Explicit” CSR: A conceptual framework for a comparative
understanding of corporate social responsibility, Academy of Management.
McDonald, R., & Carroll, J. (2006). Plagiarism—a complex issue requiring a holistic institutional
approach. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 31(2), 233–245.
Mooi, E., & Sarstedt, M. (2011). Cluster analysis. A concise guide to market research.
Nkomo, S. M. (2015). Challenges for management and business education in a “developmental” state:
The case of South Africa. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 14(2), 242–258.
Nsor-Ambala, R., & Onumah, J. M. (2015). Ethics education in management accounting studies:
Evidence from business schools in Ghana. Journal of Accounting and Taxation, 7(5), 88–96.
O’Leary, C. (2009). An empirical analysis of the positive impact of ethics teaching on accounting students. Accounting Education: an international journal, 18(4-5), 505–520.
Olibie, E. I., Agu, N. N., & Uzoechina, G. O. (2015). Characteristics of post graduate education research
Mentoring in Universities in Nigeria: Curricular enhancement strategies. Journal of Curriculum and
Teaching, 4(1), 156–166
Oredein, A. O., & Durojaye, T. G. (2012). Lecturers’ and students’ perception on educational policy
implementation factors as predictors for quality rducation in Nigerian universities. African
Higher Education Review, 6, 52–72.
Paudel, R. K. (2010). Role of ethics in modern business: an important key aspect of the concern.
Retrieved from http://www.internationalseminar.org/XIII_AIS/TS%201%20(A)/17.%20Mr.%20Ranj
it %20Kumar%20Paswan.pdf
Rasche, A., & Gilbert, D. U. (2015). Decoupling responsible management education: Why business
schools may not walk their talk. Journal of Management Inquiry, 24(3), 239–252. Review, 33(2),
404e424. right (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Rossouw, G. J. (2002). Three approaches to teaching business ethics. Teaching Business Ethics, 6(4),
411–433.
Rutherford, M. A., Parks, L., Cavazos, D. E., & White, C. D. (2012). Business ethics as a required course:
Investigating the factors impacting the decision to require ethics in the undergraduate business
core curriculum. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 11(2), 174–186.
Ryan, T. G., & Bisson, J. (2011). Can ethics be taught? International Journal of Business and Social
Science, 2(12) 44–52.
Schreiber, J. B., Nora, A., Stage, F. K., Barlow, E. A., & King, J. (2006). Reporting structural equation modeling
and conﬁrmatory factor analysis results: A review. The Journal of educational research, 99(6), 323–338.
Simpson, C. (2016). Hope and feminist care ethics: What is the connection? Canadian ournal of
Nursing Research Archive, 34(2) 81–94.
Sims, R. R. (1991). The institutionalization of organizational ethics. Journal of business ethics, 10(7),
493–506.
Siu, N. Y. M., Dickinson, J. R., & Lee, B. Y. Y. (2000). Ethical evaluations of business activities and personal religiousness. Teaching Business Ethics, 4, 239–256.
Sleeper, B. J., Schneider, K. C., Weber, P. S., & Weber, J. E. (2006). Scale and study of student attitudes
toward business education’s role in addressing social issues. Journal of Business Ethics, 68(4), 381–391.
Struwig, F. W., & Stead, G. B. (2001). Understanding reliability and validity. In Andrea Nattrass.(3 rd ed.
2004). Planning, designing and reporting research (pp. 130–142). Cape Town: Hanli Venter.
Teodorescu, D., & Andrei, T. (2009). Faculty and peer inﬂuences on academic integrity: College cheating in Romania. Higher Education, 57(3), 267–282.
Torugsa, N. A., O’Donohue, W., & Hecker, R. (2012). Capabilities, proactive CSR and ﬁnancial performance in SMEs: Empirical evidence from an Australian manufacturing industry sector. Journal of
business ethics, 109(4), 483–500.
UNESCO. (2010). Education for sustainable development. Retrieved from www.unesco.org/new/en/
education/themes/leading-the-international-agenda/education for development
Velentzas, J., & Broni, G. (2010). Ethical Dimensions in the conduct of business: Business ethics.
Corporate Social Responsibility and the Law Available from: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download

24

O. B. O. DAMOAH AND E. W. APPIAH

Waddock, S., Rasche, A., Werhane, P., & Unruh, G. (2011). The principles for responsible management
education: Implications for implementation and assessment. In D. L. Swanson, & D. G. Fisher (Eds.),
Ethics in practice: Toward assessing business ethics education (pp. 13–28). Charlotte, NC: Information
Age.
Waples, E. P., Antes, A. L., Murphy, S. T., Connelly, S., & Mumford, M. D. (2009). A meta-analytic investigation of business ethics instruction. Journal of Business Ethics, 87(1), 133–151.
Whitla, P. (2011). Integrating ethics into international business teaching: challenges and methodologies in the Greater China context. Journal of Teaching in International Business, 22(3), 168–184.
Wood, D. J. (1991). Corporate social performance revisited. Academy of management review, 16(4),
691–718.
Yu, F., & Zhang, K. (2006). Factors related to the cognitive moral development of business students
and business professionals in India and the United States: Nationality, education, sex and gender.
Journal of Business Ethics, 35(4), 255–268.

