55

Understanding the Relative Strength

Damoah et al.

Understanding the Relative Strength
of the Motives that Influence
Acquisition Strategy:
Evidence from an Emerging Market
Obi Berko O.
Damoah
University of Ghana Business
School, Ghana

Linder Opoku
University of Ghana Business
School, Ghana

Richmond AcquahColeman
Sam E. Jonah School of Business,
African University College of
Communications, Ghana

Correspondence:
Email: obodamoah@ug.edu.gh

Abstract
In the strategic management field, Acquisition is one of
the key strategies most organizations use as a development strategy. Yet, literature suggests that most
Acquisitions fail to realize the expected benefits that
drive the strategy. This paper argues that part of the
reason why most Acquisitions fail is because the
motives that drive the strategy are not critically examined. Based on this, the paper examines the relative
strengths of the motives that drive Acquisitions from the
Ghanaian context. Using a purposive sampling of 105
managers drawn from the four mobile telecommunication companies in Ghana, a descriptive statistics based
on the mean rankings of the respondents' average
scores is used as the main diagnostic tool to analyse
the data. The results indicate that in line with the
literature review, various motives influence Acquisition.
Of the12 motives that were found from the study, the
three most important ones were profitability, foreign
markets and increased in market power. Based on the
findings, implications on practice and policy are
suggested.
Keywords: mergers, acquisition, Ghana, motives.

Introduction
Strategic management literature offers a number of
strategies for firm's survival, growth, sustainability
and development (Jonhson et al., 2011; Pearce &
Robinson, 2013). Acquisition is one of such strategies; in recent times, Acquisition is considered one of
the strategies for gaining sustaining competitive
advantage (Seth, Song & Pettit, 2000; Lodorfos &
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Understanding the Relative Strength

Boateng, 2006). Yet, the motives that drive
Acquisition play a crucial role in its success
(Seth et al., 2000; Banga & Gupta, 2012).
Of the motives, Synergy, Agency and
Hubris motives are the traditional motives
often cited in literature as underpinning
Acquisitions (Berkovitch & Narayanan,
1993; Seth et al., 2000). The Synergy motive assumes that in acquisitions the
combined operations of both firms are
more profitable than that of the individual
firms combined (Chatterjee, 1986). Agency motive on the other hand, assumes that
Acquisitions take place primarily due to
the advancement of the self-interest of
managers at the expense of shareholders
(Berkovitch & Narayanan, 1993). Thus,
even though an Acquisition may not have
any probable benefits for the company,
managers may enter into Acquisitions to
the detriment of shareholders. The last
traditional motive, Hubris motive, argues
that Acquisitions occur mainly due to
overestimation of gains involved by
managers (Seth et al., 2000). After entering
into acquisition, firms discover that the
anticipated gains are non-existent and this
leads to losses to the acquirer.
The past two decades have been referred
to as acquisition and merger mania characterized by an unprecedented number of
consolidations across the world. In 2012,
the figure for Acquisition deals reached
worldwide was $2.6 trillion representing a
2 percent increment over that of 2011.
Sub-Saharan Africa deals alone were
worth $14,615 million (Thomson Reuters,
2012). Ghana is not an exception regarding the development of Acquisitions. According to Business Week Africa (2011),
Acquisitions have been in Ghana for some
time, but through the central bank's issuance of a new bank recapitalization

Damoah et al.

56

regulation in 2008, Acquisitions have
gained more popularity in Ghana (Sanda
& Adjei-Benin, 2011). Among the industries in Ghana, the telecommunication
industry has experienced series of major
Acquisitions. For instance, out of the six
(6) mobile telecommunication companies
operating in Ghana, four (4) have undergone at least one Acquisition. However, in
spite of the increasing subscription to
Acquisition as an antidote to firm growth
(Barney, 2001), research has established
that more than two-thirds of large Acquisition deals fail to create value for shareholders in the medium term (Lodorfos &
Boateng, 2006). The rate of failure of
Acquisitions worldwide has been relatively high with some studies ascribing as
high as an 88 percent failure rate
(Saunders, Altinay, & Riordan, 2009). In
Africa, Acquisitions have not been without any problems. It has been reported
that Bharti Airtel continues to experience
plummeting net profit due to losses from
its newly acquired African operations.
Profits dropped by 41 percent from $470
million in 2009 to $291 million in 2010
after its Acquisition of Zain Africa
(Ghana Business News, 2011). Similarly,
in the last quarter of 2012, profits droped
by about 50 percent (Wall Street Journal,
2013).
Research has provided a myriad of reasons for this high failure rate including
industry match (complementary of assets,
similarities of markets and products, synergies in production, strategic orientation,), pricing policy, financing, size of
operation and the type of the transaction,
bidding conditions, motives of Acquisitions, culture, leadership, communication
and so on (Mirc, 2007; Berkovitch &
Narayanan, 1993; Mitleton- Kelly, 2004).
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

57

Understanding the Relative Strength

Despite the selected challenges of Acquisitions outlined above, it is argued that the
benefits of Acquisition far outweighs the
challenges thus, this paper contends that
in order to realize the expected benefits ,
the objective that drives Acquisitions
needs to be critically examined. Whilst
literature exits in the developed countries
regarding the issue of Acquisition motives, it is not known whether evidence
from the emerging markets (e.g. Ghana)
compares or contrasts with extant studies
(Ingham, Kran & Lovestam, 1992;
Bruner, 2002).The objective of this paper,
there-fore, is to examine the relative
strengths of the motives that drive
Acquisitions from the Ghanaian perspective. To achieve the objective of the study,
the rest of the paper is subdivided as
follows. Section 2 deals with the theoretical background and hypotheses development; Section 3 deals with empirical literature and the development of hypotheses.
Section 4 concerns data and methodology
whilst Section 5 focuses on discussion and
conclusion. Section 6 deals with the implications of the study, limitations and the
effect on future research.
Theoretical Background &
Hypotheses Development
Acquisition is known to be based on
“different” rather than a single motive
(Ratajczak-Mrozek, 2015). Various studies
employ various theories to explain the
motives which drive acquisitions (e.g.
Deng and Yang, 2015 [resource dependency theory]; Mtichell and Lehn, 1990
[managerial self-interest theory]; Mota,
2004 [economies of scope]; Jensen, 1986
[managerial discretion theory]). Besides,
Trautwein (1990) outlined seven (7) different theories that explain Acquisitions.
The specific theories are efficiency theory,
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Damoah et al.

process theory, valuation theory, raider
theory, monopoly theory, empire building
theory and disturbance theory. This study
looks at four of these theories namely efficiency theory, valuation theory, empire
building theory and monopoly theory.
The reasons for the selection is that they
are commonly applied in the field (see
Ratajczak-Mrozek, 2015).
Efficiency Theory
The efficiency theory advances that
Acquisitions are created to achieve a number of synergies. Acquisitions will only
occur when they are expected to generate
enough attainable synergies to make the
deal beneficial to both parties. It is the
complementary expectations of gains that
results in the Acquisition proposal and
accepted. According to Mueller and
Sirrower (2003), synergy became popular
in the 1960s when it was used to justify
conglomerate Acquisitions which did not
yield immediate results. Synergy in the
context of Acquisitions can be explained
to be the gains that accrue to firms based
on their complementary potentials. The
ability to create value out of the symmetric
abilities of the firms involved in the consolidation is what is termed as synergy. A
range of synergy types have been advanced in Acquisition literature. Chartejee
(1986) identified collusive, operating and
financial synergy as the three main types
of synergies.
Collusive Synergy results from scarce resources that lead to increase in market
power or share. Devos, Kadapakkam and
Krishnamurthy (2009) explained that a
combination of two large competing
firms in the same industry reduces competition considerably. This leads to a reduction in prices of products or the prices

Understanding the Relative Strength

paid to their suppliers. That being the case,
they increase market power or share since
other competitors find it difficult to provide their goods and/or services at equal
or even lower prices. This type of synergy
is only realizable in horizontal Acquisitions (Chatterjee, 1986). For instance,
Devos et al. (2009) maintains that this type
of synergy increases benefits to shareholders to the detriment of government and
other stakeholders like customers and
suppliers.
Operating synergy, on the other hand, argues that administrative and productive
efficiencies are among the key motives of
Acquisition (Chatterjee, 1986). These efficiencies include technical and marketing
economies of scale and scope, increase in
profits, cost reduction and managerial efficiencies. Devos et al. (2009, p.1186) defined operating synergy as 'the increase in
after-tax operating profits less the changes
in investments”. The theory assumes that
economies of scale and scope do exist in
the industry and that before Acquisitions,
firms operate at levels of activity that deprive them from harnessing the potentials
for economies of scale. When firms come
together, they are able to increase productivity and at the same time reduce the average cost of production.
Financial synergy is associated with the
foreseeable gains in terms of reduction in
cost of capital and an increase in cash flow
(Charteejee 1986). Devos et al. (2009) explicated that a key component of financial
synergy is tax benefit. These researchers
say that companies take advantage of tax
shields, increase leverage and all other tax
advantage after Acquisitions occur. Overall tax savings go a long way to increase the
cash flow of the combined firms and this

Damoah et al.

58

is believed to be one of the reasons behind
Acquisitions. Consistent with this assertion is the notion that efficiency theory
downplays the impact of other industry
players in influencing synergy realisation.
This implies that once firms operate in an
industry with other firms, the synergies
realised through Acquisitions is partially
dependent on the ability of these rival
firms to counteract the edge the combined
firm has over them in production efficiencies, production cost, capital cost,
management capabilities and so on.
Valuation Theory
According to Steiner (1975), this theory
argues that mergers are calculated and implemented by managers who have better
information about the target's value than
the stock market. The assumption here is
that the acquirer may have peculiar and
superior information about Target Company's unrealized potential and benefits
associated with the intended union that is
unknown to others and this is what propels them into an Acquisition. Also, they
may have noticed an opportunity to sell
the target company in bits since it is undervalued.
This theory underlies the Hubris motive.
This motive suggests that Acquisitions
take place due to an error in the valuation
of Target Company by acquirer's management. The Hubris hypothesis as propounded by Roll (1986 as cited in Seth et al.,
2000) maintains that the takeover premiums paid only reflect a random error
made by managers in assessing target
firms. This error can be in the form of
over or under estimation. Whichever type
of error that is made, the premium paid is
still not equivalent to current market price
of the firm. Mueller and Sirrower (2003)
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

59

Understanding the Relative Strength

advocate that this error leads to the
winner's curse which is central to the
hubris hypothesis. The authors explain the
winner's curse to be loss accrued to the
highest bidder in Acquisition because the
winner wields the highest error in the
valuation of the target company. This is
based on the principle of a common value
auction where the asset is of equal value to
all bidders.
Roll (1986 as cited in Seth et al., 2000) distinguishes between an extreme form of
hubris and a moderate form. The extreme
version of this hypothesis is rooted in the
strong form market efficiency. This version predicts that there are no attainable
synergies in Acquisitions but only a transfer of wealth to target companies through
the payment of premiums. It also suggests
that hubris hypothesis is not based on rational management behaviour unlike the
rational profit maximisation behaviour
that underlies the synergy motive. Roll explains that if managers were to behave
rationally they would not patronize any
transaction that requires a premium price
greater than the market price which will
apparently imply an error. The moderate
version however agrees with the rational
behaviour of managers and attributes
error to a genuine mistake in valuation of
target. The overestimation of synergies by
a manager leads to overpayment in terms
of premium and this leads to loss to the
acquirer's shareholders. This theory has
been criticised on the grounds that, if the
acquirer had any private information
about the target's value other than the apparent synergies, it will would be revealed in
the biding process (Devos et al., 2009).
The stock price would climb to reflect the
new information leaving the bidder in a
winner's-curse situation (Trautwein,
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Damoah et al.

1990). Thus, the information which this
theory deems advantageous to the bidder
becomes a trap which fetches them extra
payment either in cash or stock and an
overvalued target.
Empire Building Theory
The empire-building theory advanced by
Mueller (1969 as cited in Mueller &
Sirrower, 2003) presupposes that managers propose Acquisitions to seek their selfinterest at the expense of shareholders'
value. Hellgren, Lowstedt and Werr (2011)
argued that, via this theory Acquisitions
ride on the back of managerial goals.
These goals range from sustainable growth of assets (Marris, 1964) to managers
expense preference (Williamson, 1964).
The agency motive of Acquisitions was
conceived out of this theory. Agency motive argues that Acquisitions come into
play primarily due to the advancement of
the self-interest of managers at the
expense of shareholders (Berkovitch &
Narayanan, 1993). Agency motive is based
on the concepts of bounded rationality,
hidden information, information asymmetry, risk preferences, hidden action,
moral hazard, opportunistic behaviour
and adverse selection and incentive
asymmetries (Parvinen & Tikannen,
2007). This simply implies that all actors in
the Acquisition process make decisions
based on the amount of information
available to them since they cannot have
access to all information. This information symmetry may precipitate into hidden
actions entrenched in opportunism to advance individual self-interest at the expense of other stakeholders in Acquisition.
Aggarwal and Samwick (2003) identified
two main types of agency explanations.

Understanding the Relative Strength

The first type of agency explanation is that
managers derive utility from reducing the
personal risk associated with higher equity
ownership (Aggarwal & Samwick, 2003).
Thus, the higher the equity of managers in
companies, the higher the urge to acquire
more firms in order to diversify investment and reduce the risk of keeping all
equity tied up in one firm. The second
explanation of agency is that managers go
into Acquisition to derive some private
benefits. These private benefits ranges
from prestige, better career prospects associated with running a more diversified
firm, increase in asset size since their
salary is often tied to the number of assets
they control and the entrenchment of
managers due to increase in their value
(Aggarwal & Samwick, 2003).
Monopoly theory
This theory is similar to the collusive synergy argument advanced by Chatterjee
(1986). However, this theory advances
that not only do Acquisitions lead to
increase in market share, but also create
barriers to entry into an industry. According to this theory, Acquisitions come into
play because firms have the need to
increase market power. Chatterjee (1986)
explained that this type of motive is only
attainable in horizontal Acquisitions.
Trautwein (1990) iterated that, conglomerate or unrelated Acquisitions can also
attain market power through; subsidizing
one product to gain market share with the
profit from other products from other
markets; controlling competition in more
than one market at the same time. This is
done through tacit collusion with the
competitors it meets in various markets.
Other possible ways of limiting competition in more than one market are reciprocal dealing and combining business func-

Damoah et al.

60

tions such as purchasing. Here, market
leaders can also prevent new and potential
entrants into their market through concentric Acquisition. This theory just like
the one above ignores the ability of the
firms acting in the same industry to counteract or adopt similar measures to achieve
an advantage. The theory is far from reality since all actors in the industry play a
role in a firms bid to achieve any form of
advantage. As explained by Chatterjee,
(1986) the impact of Acquisitions on rival
firms in the industry is proportional to the
other firms' ability to offset the advantage
gained through Acquisitions. Trautwein
(1990) concluded that gains advanced by
the monopoly theory are elusive, with studies not showing favourable result and
industry results showing weaker impact
while company results are mixed.
Empirical Literature on Motives
Driving Acquisitions
In the light of theoretical discussions
above, this section of the paper presents
the empirical literature.
Synergy Motive
Synergy motive seeks to create or increase
shareholder value. The primary reason for
these set of motives is to unearth the complementary potential of both firms and
subsequently create value such that the
value of the combined firm exceeds the
pre-Acquisition value of the individuals
firms put together. Penrose's (1959 as
cited in Seth, Song, Pettit, 2002) explanation for firms' growth gives credence to
underlying reason of synergy. He explained that, the long run profitability of
firms is dependent on its ability to grow
the productive opportunities of the firm.
Thus, the need for these productive opportunities drives firms into markets and
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

61

Understanding the Relative Strength

products which will ensure efficient
production and increasing revenues.
Synergy is an umbrella word with a number of motives under it. In line with the
efficiency theory, Seth et al. (2002) have
said that multiple motives coexist under
synergy. This category of motives refers
to only those groups of reasons that
predict positive returns for Acquisitions
initiatives. According to Berkovitch &
Narayanan (1993), synergy is one of the
key motives for acquisitions (1993).
Economies of Scale and Scope
Economies of scale and scope are specific
motives under synergy. From the efficiency theory, one of the motives behind
Acquisitions is economies of scale and
scope. Evidence on this type of benefit in
Acquisitions was found by Ingham et al.
(1992) in their study of Acquisition motives in the UK. They found marketing
and technical economies of scale as the
3rd and 8th most important motive explaining Acquisitions from the manager's
perspective. Walter and Barney (1990) also
found exploitation of economies of scale
as one of the clusters of motives driving
Acquisitions. Although, this motive was
found to be of moderate importance to
Acquisition decision. This is also evident
in Banga and Gupta's (2012) study, where
they found that Acquisition of mutual
funds are influenced by synergy. Their
explanation for synergy presupposes the
inclusion of economies of scale and
scope.
Financial motive
Studies (e.g. Walter & Barney, 1990;
Chakrabarti (1984; Hu (2009) found nonsignificant relationship between Acquisition and financial performance. For instance, Ferrer (2012) identified that
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Damoah et al.

Acquisitions do not increase profitability
since it has a negative effect on return on
equity as well as return on asset. Similarly,
Kemal (2011) after analysing the postAcquisition financial records of Royal
Bank of Scotland found that Acquisition
did not increase profitability. They found
that out of the four main financial ratios
analysed, it is only the solvency ratio of the
bank that improved after the merger. Thus
they concluded that since it suffices to use
these ratios as measure of profitability for
banks, then the Acquisition failed to increase the bank's profitability. This is in
concurrence with Souder and Chakrabarti's (1984) finding that, there exists a
negative relationship between Acquisition
performance and increased profit motive.
In Africa, Okpanachi (2011) found that,
mergers and Acquisitions did not lead to
any significant increase in after tax profit,
net assets and gross earnings. Other evidence exits to counter the non-significant
effect of Acquisition and financial performance. From the efficiency theory,
financial benefits which include tax credits
and other tax advantages, reduction in
capital cost, increase in cash flow, creation
of an internal capital market for efficient
allocation of resources and reduction in
risk associated with an organisations
investment portfolio are part of the
reasons driving Acquisitions (Chatterjee,
1986; Trautwein, 1990; Walter & Barney,
1990; Devos et al., 2009). All the above
authors have attested to the fact that
financial benefits underlie Acquisition initiatives. Okpanachi (2011) however found
that Acquisitions in Nigerian banks led to
a significant increase in financial efficiency
of these banks since two out of the three
parameters showed significant increase. In
addition, Ingham et al. (1992) found it as
the most important reason that drives

Understanding the Relative Strength

Acquisitions. Altunbaz and Ibanez (2004)
found evidence for this motive when they
concluded that Acquisitions lead to an
improvement in the performance of cross
border Acquisitions.

Damoah et al.

62

emerging markets where growth rate is
relatively higher. In this study, the author
found that Acquisitions give these firms
the opportunity to launch into new products areas which were not previously
explored.

Increase in Market Share/Power
This type of motive has also been emphasized in the work of Banga and Gupta
(2012), Walter and Barney (1990) and
Ingham et al. (1992). Ingham et al. (1992)
found that this motive is the second most
important motive after increase profitability. Although, Souder and Chakrabarti
(1984) identified a negative relationship
between this type of motive and Acquisition performance. This is one of the
only two motives that showed a significant
relationship in the study. Between the two,
this motive showed the highest significance with a correlation coefficient of 0.645 even though it was negative.
Contrary to this, Ghosh (2004) enunciated
that this motive underlies Acquisition and
actually found evidence of increasing
market share after analysing 2000 US
Acquisitions that took place between 1980
and 1990. He found that increased market
share leads to the long run profitability of
firms.

Barriers to Entry
The monopoly theory advances that, as
much as organisations use Acquisitions to
enter into new geographical and product
markets, they use it also to regulate entry
into the markets in which they already
operate (Ingham et al., 1992; Walter &
Barney, 1990). Ingham et al. (1992) found
that this motive is one of the least important motives underlying Acquisitions.
Walter and Barney (1990) also found the
entry into new product lines to be of
medium importance to Acquisition.
Barth, Jahera, Phumiwasana and Yost
(2012) found that the potency of this
motive of Acquisition is fast reducing due
to both domestic and global (WTO)
efforts and thus more and more firms are
undertaking Acquisitions. Coate (2008)
said that even though evidence of barriers
to entry exists there is more to this than
the cost blocking entry advanced by
theorist.

Entry into New Markets
The efficiency theory suggests entry into
new market as one of the motives that
drive Acquisitions. In the wake of this
intense competition and pressures of the
globalized worlds, research has established that organisations have resorted to
Acquisitions as way of entering new
markets be it geographically or product
wise. Harding (2010) identified the opportunity Acquisitions have given to pharmaceutical industries in the United States of
America, Europe and Japan to enter into

Risk Reduction
Acquisitions occur to take advantage of
financial synergies which include risk
reduction. This motive was ranked as the
fourth most important motive in Ingham
et al.'s (1992) study. Zhu and Jog (2012)
found evidence of this type of motive and
its impact on Acquisition. They found that
cross border Acquisitions lead to a reduction in the target firm's risk. They purported that this is mainly due to changes in
the international shareholder base of a
firm. Domestic Acquisitions, on the other
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

63

Understanding the Relative Strength

hand, they claimed, lead to an increase in
the risk of target. Seth et al. (2002)
proposed that cross-border Acquisitions
cause a reduction in the risk associated
with acquiring firms. They also attributed
this reduction to the advantages of international equity markets and differences in
markets for products, corporate control,
capital and labour. From this, it can be said
this motive is important to both acquiring
and target firms' value and performance
since the evidence in literature suggests
that both parties to Acquisition realize this
motive.
Managerial Efficiency
The proxy for managerial efficiency in
Ingham et al.'s (1992) study showed that
this motive is of high importance to
Acquisitions since it was found in the top
five motives behind Acquisitions. This
motive suggests that Acquisitions take
place because firms often lack the required
management capabilities and wish to take
advantage of superior managerial capabilities in other firms. This motive has
been established in literature by a number
of authors (Ingham et al., 1992; Walter &
Barney, 1990). Its relation to Acquisition
performance has been contested. Based
on the good performance of target firms
prior to Acquisitions, Song and Chu
(2011, p. 152) found that in Malaysia, takeover market witnessed the enhancing of
the earning base by the acquiring firms
rather than playing the disciplinary role for
under-performing targets'. They attributed Acquisition performance rather to
agency-related issues of ownership concentration and related party transaction.
Cost Reduction
Cornett, McNutt and Tehrahian (2006)
found that large Acquisitions, geographiAfrican Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Damoah et al.

cally-focused Acquisitions and activity focused Acquisitions enjoy relatively higher
post Acquisitions performance due to revenue enhancement and cost reduction.
They went further to say that Acquisitions
that enjoy revenue enhancement are those
that operate at a reduced cost. In spite of
the importance of cost reduction in
underlying Acquisition decisions, it was
found to be of moderate importance to
Acquisition decision by Ingham et al.
(1992). However, all of the above motives
can be categorized under synergy motive.
Research (e.g. Berkovitch & Narayanan,
1993; Seth et al., 2000; 2002; McCann,
2004) has found that the synergy motive
results in positive total gain to the acquirer
as well as the target companies.
Agency Motive
Berkovitch and Narayanan (1993) found
that agency motive explains the poor performance of Acquisitions. They explained
that there is a negative relationship between agency motive and total gains and
acquirer's gain. However, target companies realize positive gains when Acquisition is underlain by the agency motive.
Seth et al. (2000) found similar evidence in
do-mestic US Acquisitions. They found
that, in value reducing Acquisitions,
agency motives appeared the dominant
underlying reason for the Acquisition and
not hubris. Seth et al. (2002) confirmed
these same findings for cross border
Acquisitions. In summary, literature
identifies the agency motives as the most
dominant motive underlying value
destroying or unsuccessful Acquisitions.
Agency motive has, however, been found
to underlie certain value maximizing
Acquisitions, but only to a minimum
degree. In such cases, it was found that
though the agency problem was present, it

Understanding the Relative Strength

Damoah et al.

64

was the synergy motive which was the
overarching motive (Berkovitch &
Narayanan, 1993).

ment, opportunity for foreign market entry,
economies of scale and the increased in market power before all other motives

Hubris Motive
Consistent with the view of moderate
hubris, Berkovitch and Narayanan (1993)
found evidence of hubris in a subsample
which resulted in positive gains to targets.
However, the hubris motive was found to
have a negative effect on gains to the
acquired firm and no effect on total gains.
Similarly, McCann (2004) found evidence
of hubris in a study of UK Acquisitions.
The author explained that in Acquisitions
which realized negative total gains, hubris
is unlikely to be the motive behind it. In
those that experienced positive total gains,
he found a negative relationship between
acquirer and target gains indicating the
presence of hubris motive. This is because
in that subsample, there were significant
gains to targets while acquirers experienced significant losses. In tandem with
the above, earlier work by Roll (1986) found that the existence of the hubris
motive cannot lead to any form of gain in
Acquisitions. This evidence, gathered
from a sample of US Acquisitions, was
not contrary to later findings (Berkovitch
& Narayanan, 1993; McCann, 2004).
Empirical literature above show that a
number of motives drive Acquisitions.
Following the motivations of the findings
above, the following hypotheses regarding
the relative strength of Acquisitions motives is proposed.

Data & Methodology
The population of the study consists of
mobile telecommunication companies in
Ghana that have undergone acquisitions.
Mobile telecommunication companies in
Ghana that fall into this category were
four namely: Scancom Ghana Limited
(MTN), Airtel Ghana Limited, Vodafone
Ghana Limited and Expresso Limited.
The study was undertaken in Accra; Accra
is the capital and also the largest commercial city of Ghana. The head offices of
most companies operating in Ghana, including those under consideration in this
study, are located in Accra. For these companies their strategic decisions are made
from the head offices and the majority of
the workforce are based in Accra compared to the other regions of Ghana.
Questionnaire was the main data collecting instrument employed for the study.
Purposive and quota sampling were employed to draw the sample of the study
consisting of 105 senior and middle managers drawn from the four main mobile
telecommunication companies mentioned above. Self-administered questionnaire was the main data collection instrument used to collect the data. The sample
size for the study was estimated based on
Watson's (2001) table for calculating a
representative sample. The data were analysed based on descriptive statistics of the
respondents' average score to ascertain
the means and the standard deviations of
the 12 motives following the review of the
empirical literature. Table 1 presents the
description of the data.

H1: More than one motive will influence the
Acquisition of firms
H2: Among the motives underlying Acquisitions, profitability motive will rank higher,
followed by the interest of senior manage-

African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

65

Understanding the Relative Strength

Damoah et al.

Table 1: Description of the Data
Variable

Frequency

Percentage (%)

Cumulative (100%)

Companies
MTN
Vodafone
Airtel
Expresso
Total

34
51
11
9
105

32
49
10
9
100

32
81
91
100

Gender of respondent
Male
Female
Total

61
44
105

58.1
41.9
100

58.1%
100.

Rank in Company
Top management
Middle management
Total

25
80
105

23.8
76.2
100

23.8
100

From Table 1, the management of
Vodafone is the highest represented, followed by MTN. The least firm that is
represented is Expresso; this is partly
because it is the smallest mobile telecommunication firm in terms of customer
patronage. In terms of gender, more male
managers are represented compared to
females, which is 58 percent and 42
percent respectively. Workforce in middle
management positions were more
represented compared to the top manage-

ment that is 76 percent and 24 percent
respectively. This is so because the down
size of most organizations is more than
the top.
Analysis and Results
By measuring the motives on a scale of 1
to 5 with 3 meaning neither agree nor
disagree, and 5 meaning strongly agree.
Table 2 below presents the results of the
relative strengths of the 12 motives.

Table 2: The Relative Strength of Acquisition Motives
Nos. Motives
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Increased profitability
Entry into new markets
Pursuit of market power/share
Marketing/technical economies
of scale
Cost reduction
Utilise financial strength of the
acquire firm such as foreign tax
credit or borrowing capacity
To enhance asset size
Differential valuation of target

African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Relative
Importance

4.27
4.03
3.99
3.82

.812
.753
.953
.647

High
High
Moderate
Moderate

3.69
3.37

.913
.901

Moderate
Low

3.21
3.21

.917
1.007

Low
Low

Understanding the Relative Strength

66

Damoah et al.

Table 2: The Relative Strength of Acquisition Motives (cont’d)
Nos. Motives
9

10
11
12

Fulfil the personal ambition,
vision, or some particular goal
of the acquiring company's
chief executive
Creating change
Spreading of risk
To replace inefficient managers

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Relative
Importance

3.21

1.071

Low

3.12
3.07
3.03

1.053
.973
1.033

Low
Low
Low

From Table 2, relative importance of the
motive that influence Acquisition is divided into three categories namely, high
importance, moderate and low. From the
Table, motives with means ≥ 4 are considered high importance. The next category
consists of means that range from 3.50 –
3.99 which are considered moderate importance whilst those below 3.5 are considered low importance. Overall, it can be
seen that the motive to increase profitability appeared the first most important factor with the value of 4.27. This is followed
by the motive to enter new market which
had a mean value of 4.03. Three motives
fell under the moderate category which
are: to pursue market power, achieve economies of scale and cost reduction. The
remaining 7 motives fell under the low
category. Of the low category, the motive
to replace inefficient managers became
the least important motive.
Discussion & Conclusion
Acquisitions have been known to be
caused by a constellation of reasons.
Berkovitch and Narayanan (1993) found
that synergy motive is the most dominant
motive behind Acquisitions. Consistent
with this assertion is findings of this research. All the top five motives in the high
and moderate importance categories can

be classified under the three main synergies expanded by Chatterjee (1986).
This study supports the research hypothesis that synergy is the most important
motive that drives firms into Acquisition.
Firms go into business to maximize shareholder wealth through growth. This growth has been advanced to come about as a
result of internal innovation or external
Acquisition. Acquisitions have emerged as
one of the mechanisms through which
firms attain this objective. Barney (2001)
argues that firms grow by the size of the
target firms through Acquisitions. Thus, it
is easier to comprehend the impact of
Acquisitions than that of internal innovation. Although the motive to increase
profitability ranked the highest, the H2 is
not fully supported because the next important motive was the desire to gain entry
into new market instead of the personal
interest of senior management as advanced by the agency theory. The opportunity to gain foreign market entry which
hypothesized to be the third highest motive became the second highest from the
findings.
Acquisitions have been known to be
caused by a constellation of reasons.
Berkovitch and Narayanan (1993) found
that synergy motive is the most dominant

African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

67

Understanding the Relative Strength

motive behind Acquisitions. Consistent
with this assertion is findings of this research. All the top five motives in the high
and moderate importance categories can
be classified under the three main synergies expanded by Chatterjee (1986). This
study thus supports the research hypothesis that synergy is the most important
motive that drives firms into Acquisition.
Firms go into business to maximize
shareholder wealth through growth. This
growth has been advanced to come about
as a result of internal innovation or external Acquisition. Acquisitions have emerged as one of the mechanisms through
which firms attain this objective.
Despite the association of both internal
innovation and Acquisition with a high
level of risk, Acquisition outcomes are
more foreseeable and accurately predictable. Barney (2001) says that firms grow
by the size of the target firms through
Acquisitions. Thus, it is easier to comprehend the impact of Acquisitions than that
of internal innovation. Although the motive to increase profitability ranked the
highest, the H2 is not fully supported
because the next important motive was
the desire to gain entry into new market
instead of the personal interest of senior
management as advanced by the agency
theory. The opportunity to gain foreign
market entry which hypothesized to be the
third highest motive became the second
highest from the findings.
Gentzoglanis and Henten (2010) argue
that, due to globalization and technological changes from the mid-1990s and onwards, the telecommunications industry is
seen as a rather emerging industry than a
matured industry. The Information Communication Technology (ICT) market in
Ghana is not different from the global one
African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Damoah et al.

since it is equally emerging and set to be a
major player in African ICT in the next
five years along with countries like Kenya
and South Africa (KPMG, 2012). According to KPMG (2012), there exists considerable investment opportunities in the
industry since the market grows aggressively in all segments. Firms go into
Acquisitions to strengthen their global
capabilities in emerging markets.
Research has shown that, these synergies
are seldom recognized, however, firms
still go into Acquisitions because of the
excitement that they can actually achieve
these synergies. For instance, all the four
companies used in this study that were
acquired by foreign companies give credence to the above argument. Consequently, in analysing the particular goals,
this research finds that in horizontal
Acquisition which is the main type of
Acquisition analysed in this study, the
most dominant motive is to increase profitability. This finding is contrary to that of
Walter and Barney (1990) who explained
that in horizontal Acquisitions, there is no
highly important motive. They explained
that horizontal Acquisitions seek to accomplish a number of objectives simultaneously as advanced by Chatterjee (1986).
However, as stated above, in emerging
markets like the telecommunications industry in Ghana, Acquisitions are motivated by the acquirer's desire to increase
global capabilities. It is against this backdrop that firms may seek to operate profitable ventures in all places where they operate in order to be able to continually
expand into new frontiers. Therefore, it is
reasonable to imply that all firms in the
telecommunications industry that undertake Acquisitions do so in anticipation to
expand. This is consistent with the find-

Understanding the Relative Strength

ings of Capron and Mitchel (1998) that
telecommunications mergers are driven
by geographic expansion.
In order to justify the need for a new
Acquisition, the previous one must have
turned appreciable profits. Kemal (2011)
said that most of these firms’ prime concern in Acquisition is about whether or
not they have enough money to pay their
bills or the company is doing better than
before Acquisition. When answers to
these questions are in the positive, then
they can think of how to attain more
global capabilities. Profitability gives them
assurance of the need to gain more global
capabilities. This is evident in the next
highly important motive found in this
study which is entry into new markets. As
stated in the literature review section,
firms often ride on the back of
Acquisition to enter new global markets.
This research, therefore, concludes that
telecommunications industries are keen
on expanding their global capabilities
through entry into new markets. However
their outmost concern is that each Acquisition they undertake turns profit for the
organisation in order to be able to further
pursue their objective of expanding global
capabilities.
Overall, the purpose of this research is to
examine the relative strength of the motives driving Acquisitions in the Ghanaian
telecommunication sector. In assessing
the relative importance of the motives, a
mean ranking of the respondents' average
scores of the motives is employed. The
empirical findings indicate that in line with
existing empirical studies, a variety of motives influence Acquisition decisions in
Ghana (e.g. increased profitability, entry
into new markets, pursuit of market po-

Damoah et al.

68

wer or share, marketing or technical economies of scale and cost reduction). This
implies that the hypothesis H1 is supported. The most important among these
motives is the synergy motive. Particularly,
increased profitability emerged as the
most important synergy motive in horizontal telecommunications Acquisitions.
This is fueled by acquirer's bid to increase
their global capabilities. The realisation of
these synergies and its subsequent impact
on Acquisition performance are not certain in the telecommunications industry in
Ghana. However, all these motives were
found not to have an impact on Acquisition performance.
Implications of the study
Implication for Policy & Practice
On the organizational level, the present
study has practical implications for businesses. The present study indicated that,
the main motive driving Acquisitions is to
make profit. Thus, acquiring companies
tend to target local firms with higher cash
flow potentials in order to increase their
profitability when they merge or take over.
It suggests, therefore, that management
of local firms particularly in emerging
economies such as Ghana should look to
make themselves profitable by continually
developing innovative ways such as exploring new areas of business which are
lucrative to sustain their competitive advantage.
This will enhance their chances of being
acquired or merged with bigger foreign
firms which have the resources and capacity for expansion as well as sustainability.
Similarly, using the acquired firms as the
entry strategy to the host country too
became another significant motive. Implicitly, host company firms must make
themselves attractive because foreign inAfrican Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

69

Understanding the Relative Strength

vestors aim at a higher return on investment. In light of motives that were found
in Ghana, an implicit assumption is that
when foreign firms enter the host country
via acquisitions, local capacity is built, including impact on employment. As a result, host governments in developing
countries must create the enabling environment by strengthening public institutions (e.g. ministries, departments, and
agencies) to facilitate the flow of inward
foreign direct investments through mergers and acquisitions.

Damoah et al.

sed on the ability of respondents to recall.
Thus respondents may have problems
providing accurate information for Acquisitions that took place over a long time.
The restriction of this study to the telecommunications industry reduces the ability to generalize findings to all industry
since different organisations have peculiar
characteristics that distinguish them from
other industries.

Limitations of the study
Even though the use of quota sampling
catered for drawing a representative sample of management, it must be said that
this research only employs non-probability sampling techniques. Again, the use
of questionnaire or subjective method for
measuring Acquisition performance is ba-

Implication for future research
In assessing the impact of motives on
Acquisition performance, there is the
need for further research into the role
played by industry characteristics such as
competition in the telecommunications
industry in Ghana. Research should consider the moderating and mediating effect
of competition in assessing the role of
motive in determining Acquisition performance.

REFERENCES
Aggarwal, R. J. & Samwick, A. A. (2003). “Why
do managers diversify their firms? Agency
reconsidered”. The Journal of Finance,
58/1, p. 71-118.
Altunbaz, Y. & Ibanez, D. M. (2004). Mergers
and Acquisitions and bank performance
in Europe: The role of strategic similarities. (Working Paper Series Number
398). Frankfurt am Main, Germany: European Central Bank.
Banga, C. & Gupta, A. (2012). Motives for
mergers and takeovers in the Indian mutual
fund Industry. Vikalpa, 37/2, p. 33-42.
Barney, J. B. (2001). Gaining and sustaining
competitive advantage, (2nd ed). New
Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Barth, J., Jahera, J., Phumiwasana, T. & Yost, K.
(2012). What determines the number and

value of bank mergers and Acquisitions
around the globe?. Banking and Finance
Review, 1, p. 59-76.
Berkovitch, E. & Narayanan, M. P. (1993).
Motives for takeovers: An empirical investigation. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 28/3, p. 347-362.
Bruner, R. F. (2002). Does M&A pay a survey
of evidence for the decision-maker?. Journal of Applied Finance, Spring/ Summer
2002, p. 48-68.
Business Week Africa (2011). Merger and
Acquisition wave hits Ghana's banking
Industry. Retrieved: http://mybusinesswe
ekafrica.com/topheadlines_detail.php?ID
=533 (June 11, 2011)
Capron, L. & Mitchell, W. (1998). The role of
Acquisitions in reshaping business capabi-

African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Understanding the Relative Strength

lities in the international telecommunications industry. Industrial and Corporate
Change, 7/4, p. 715730.
Chatterjee, S. (1986). Types of synergy and
economic value: The impact of Acquisitions on merging and rival firms. Strategic Management Journal, 7/ 2, p. 119139.
Chen, S. S. (2008). The motives for international Acquisitions: Capability procurements, strategic considerations, and the
role of ownership structures. Journal of
International Business Studies, 39, p.
454-471.
Coate, M. B. (2008). Theory meets practice:
barriers to entry in merger analysis. Review
of Law and Economics, 4/1, p. 183-212.
Cornett, M. M., Mcnutt, J. J. & Tehranian, H.
(2006). Performance changes around bank
mergers: Revenue enhancements versus
cost reductions. Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 38/4, p. 1013-1050.
Deng, P. & Yang, M. (2015), Cross-border
mergers and acquisition by emerging market firms: A Comparative Investigation,
International Business Review, 24, 157172,
Devos, E., Kadapakkam, P. & Krishnamurthy,
S. (2009). How do mergers create value? A
Comparison of taxes, market power, and
efficiency improvements as explanations
for synergies. The Review of Financial
Studies, 22/3, p.1179-1211.
Ferrer, R. C. (2012). An empirical investigation of the effects of merger and Acquisition on firms' Profitability. Academy of
Accounting and Financial Studies Journal, 16/3, p. 31-55.
Gentzoglanis, A. & Henten, A. (2010). Regulation and the evolution of the global
Telecommunications industry. England:
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.
Ghosh, A. (2004). Increasing market share as a
rationale for corporate Acquisitions. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting,
31/1, p. 209-247.
Harding, D. (2010). Gaining market share in
the generic drug industry through Acq-

Damoah et al.

70

uisitions and partnerships. (White Paper). Philadelphia: Thomson Reuters. Retrieved from http://thomsonreuters.com/
content/science/pdf/ls/newport-deals.
pdf
Hellgren, B., Lowstedt, E. & Werr, A. (2011).
The reproduction of efficiency theory: The
construction of the AstraZeneca merger in
the public discourse. International Journal of Business and Management, 6/ 5,
p. 16-27.
Hu, Y. (2009). The long term performance
of acquiring firms: Evidence from Chinese stock market. Retrieved from http:/
/arno.unimaas.nl/show.cgi?fid=16865
Ingham, H., Kran, I. & Lovestam, A. (1992).
Mergers and profitability: A managerial success story? Journal of Management Studies, 29 p. 195–208.
Jensen, M. C., (1986). Agency Costs of Free
Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers, American Economic Review, 76,
323-329
Johnson, G., Whittington, R. & Scholes, K.
(2011). Exporing Strategy: Text & Cases,
9ed. England
Kemal, M. U. (2011). Post-Merger profitability: A case of Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS).
International Journal of Business and
Social Science, 2/5, p. 157-162.
KPMG (2012). Doing Business in Ghana.
Accra: KPMG Retrieved from http://www
.kpmg.com/GH/en/Documents/Doing
%20business%20in%20Ghana%202012.pdf
Lodorfos, G. & Boateng, A. (2006). The role
of culture in the merger and Acquisition
process: Evidence from the European chemical industry. Management Decision,
44/10, p. 1405-1421.
Marris, R. (1964). The economic theory of
managerial capitalism. New York: Free
Press.
Glencoe McCann, M. (2004). Motives for
Acquisitions in the UK. Discussion Papers in Applied Economics and Policy.
Retrieved from http://www.ntu.ac.uk/
research/document_uploads/31286.pdf

African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

71

Understanding the Relative Strength

Mirc, N. (2007). Mergers and Acquisitions:
revisiting the human factor in the light
of a knowledge-based view of the firm
and complexity theory. Paper presented at
EIASM 22nd workshop on Strategic
Human Resource Management, France.
Retrieved from http://crg.polytechnique
.fr/fichiers/crg/publications/pdf/200707-02-1189.pdf
Mitleton-Kelly, E. (2004). Co-Evolutionary
integration: A complexity perspective
on Mergers & Acquisitions. Paper presented at the 20th EGOS Colloquium,
Ljubljana University, Slovenia. Retrieved
from http://www.triarchpress.com/pages/
articles/Co-evolutionary-perspective-onma.pdf
Mueller, D. C. (1969). A theory of conglomerate mergers. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 83, 643-659.
Mitchell, M. and Lehn, K. (1990). Do bad bidders make good targets? Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 3, 60-69.
Motis, J., (2007). Merger and Acquisition
Motives. Toulouse School of Economics –
EHES (GREMAQ) and University of Crete
Mueller, D. C. (1969). A theory of conglomerate mergers. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 83, 643-659.
Mueller, D. C. and Sirrower, M. L. (2003). The
causes of mergers: Tests based on the gains
to Acquiring firms' shareholders and the
size of premia. Managerial and Decision
Economics, 24/5, 373-391.
Okpanachi, J. (2011). Comparative analysis of
the impact of mergers and Acquisitions on
financial Efficiency of banks in Nigeria.
Journal of Accounting and Taxation,
3/1, 1-7.
Parvinen, P. and Tikannen, H. (2007). Incentive asymmetries in the mergers and Acquisitions Process. Journal of Management
Studies, 44/ 5, 759-787.
Pearce, J. A. and Robinson, R. B. (2013). Strategic Management: Planning for Domestic & Global Competition. Singapore: McGraw Hill, Pearson Education
Limited

African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

Damoah et al.

Ratajczak-Mrozek, M. (2015), The SMEs'
Perspective on Motives and Success Factors
in Crossborder Mergers – The Importance
of Network Position. IMP Journal, 9, 2, 1 36.
Roll, R. (1986). The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers. The Journal of Business, 59 (2) 197-216.
Sanda, M. A. and Adjei-Benin, P. (2011). How
is the firm dealing with the merger? A study
of Employee satisfaction with the change
pro-cess. Journal of Management and
Strategy, 2/2, 28-37.
Saunders M. N. K., Altinay, L. & Riordan, K.
(2009). The management of post-merger
cultural integration: implications from the
hotel industry. Service Industries Journal, 29/ 10, 1359-1375.
Seth, A., Song, K. & Pettit, R (2000). Synergy,
managerialism or hubris? An empirical examination of motives for foreign Acquisitions of us firms, Journal of International
Business Studies, 31/ 3, 387-405
Seth, A., Song, K. & Pettit, R. (2002). Value
creation and destruction in cross-border
Acquisitions: An empirical analysis of foreign Acquisitions of U.S. firms. Strategic
Management Journal, 23, 921-940.
Song, I. & Chu, E. (2011). Corporate takeovers in Malaysia: Value creation or agency
conflicts? International Research Journal of Finance and Economics, 75, 138156.
Souder, W. E. & Chakrabarti, A. K. (1984).
Acquisitions: do they really work out? Interfaces, 14/ 4, 41-47.
Steiner, P. O. (1975). Mergers: motives, effects, policies. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Trautwein, F. (1990). Merger motives and merger prescriptions. Strategic Management
Journal, 11/4, 283-295.
Thomson Reuters (2012). Mergers & Acquisitions review financial advisors: full
year 2012. Retrieved: http://dmi.thomson
reuters.com/Content/Files/4Q2012_MA
_Financial_Advisory_Review.pdf
Wall Street Journal (2013). Bharti Airtel

Understanding the Relative Strength

Damoah et al.

72

Profit Halves, Misses Forecast. Retrieved from http://online.wsj.com/article/
SB100014241278873242669045784579040
32093168.html. 3 May 2013.
Walter, G. A. & Barney, J. B. (1990). Management objectives in mergers and Acquisitions. Strategic Management Journal,
11/1, 79-86.
Zhu P. & Jog, V. (2012). Impact on Target Firm
Risk-Return Characteristics of Domestic
and Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions in Emerging Markets. Emerging
Market Finance and Trade, 48/ 4, 101.

African Journal of Management Research (AJMR)

