The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/1755-425X.htm

in the
Strategy in the era of “swans”: the Strategy
era of “swans”
role of strategic leadership under
uncertainty and unpredictability

Henry Adobor
Strategy and Entrepreneurship, Quinnipiac University School of Business,
Hamden, Connecticut, USA

William Phanuel Kofi Darbi

Received 14 September 2020
Revised 1 March 2021
Accepted 10 July 2021

Business School, Ghana Institute of Mangement and Public Administration,
Accra, Ghana, and

Obi Berko O. Damoah
Department of Organizations and Human Resources,
University of Ghana Business School, Accra, Ghana
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this conceptual paper is to explore the role of strategic leadership under conditions
of uncertainty and unpredictability. The authors argue that highly improbable, but high-impact events require
the upper echelons of management, traditionally the custodians of strategy formulation to offer a new kind of
strategic leadership focused on new mindsets, organizational capabilities, more in tune with high uncertainty
and unpredictability.
Design/methodology/approach – Drawing on strategic leadership, and complexity leadership theory, the
authors review the literature and present a conceptual framework for exploring the nature of strategic
leadership under uncertainty. The authors conceptualize organizations as complex adaptive systems and
discuss the imperatives for developing new mental models for emergent leadership.
Findings – Strategic leaders have a key role to play in preparing their organizations for episodic disruptions.
These include developing their adaptive capabilities and building resilient organizations to ensure their
organizations cannot only bounce back after a disruption but have the capacity for transformation to new
fitness levels when necessary. Strategic leaders must engage with complexity leadership by seeing their
organizations as complex adaptive systems, reconfigure their leadership approaches and organizations to
build strategic adaptive capability.
Research limitations/implications – This is a conceptual paper and the authors cannot make any claims of
causality.
Practical implications – Organizational leaders need to reconfigure their mental models and leadership
approaches to reflect the new normal of uncertainty and unpredictability. Developing the strategic adaptive
capability of organizations should prepare them for dealing with high impact events. To assure business
continuity in the face of disruptions requires building flexible, adaptable business models.
Originality/value – The paper focuses on how managers can offer strategic leadership for a new normal that
challenges some of our most cherished leadership and strategic management paradigms. The authors explore
the new mental models and leadership models in an era of great uncertainty.
Keywords Strategic leadership, Adaptive capacity, Resilience, Uncertainty, Strategic adaptive capability,
Business model flexibility, COVID-19
Paper type Conceptual paper

1. Introduction
Organizations face uncertainty from both external and internal environments. Organization
theorists define uncertainty as the inability to predict the likelihood of future events
(e.g. Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967). Uncertainty, whether originating from markets or the
general environment, is a factor organizations routinely deal, and learn to live with. What
organizations may be ill-prepared for are the episodic uncertainties; those that arise because

Journal of Strategy and
Management
© Emerald Publishing Limited
1755-425X
DOI 10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

of events that happen infrequently, but have high impact, and a pandemic such as COVID-19
may be an example of this kind of high impact event.
Research in strategic management has demonstrated that market uncertainty affects firm
value creation (Barney, 1986) and appropriation (Zott and Huy, 2007). Strategic management
research has also focused on the role of leadership as a means for dealing with uncertainty.
Upper echelons theory (Hambrick and Mason, 1984) demonstrates that leadership at the
highest levels affects strategy formation and performance. Samimi et al. (2020) argue that
uncertainty and environmental dynamism influence strategic leadership performance. More
recent advances in leadership research suggest that leading under conditions of uncertainty
may require new forms of leadership and organizational capabilities (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007).
Indeed, our understanding of how to manage under the sort of uncertainties associated with
disruptive events may be fairly limited and gaps remain in our understanding of the role of
the upper echelons in managing their organizations and creating value under disruptive
conditions. For example, a recent McKinsey Report (Bar Am et al., 2020) noted that not all
executives know how to deal with disruptive events such as the recent coronavirus pandemic
(COVID -19).
Zhang et al. (2012) observed that strategy research has not adequately focused on the role
of strategic leaders in firm performance. This is an important omission, given that
organizational and employee outcomes are more dependent on strategic leaders when
uncertainty is high as employees turn to leaders for guidance during periods of uncertainty
(Waldman et al., 2001). The present research attempts to bridge some of the existing gaps by
developing a framework linking strategic leadership to organizational outcomes under
conditions of uncertainty. We argue that strategic leaders need to develop new mindsets and
capabilities for managing under uncertainty. Specifically, strategic leaders need to enhance
their strategic adaptive capability. We identify who strategic leaders are, what they should
do, including the new mental models they should cultivate, and how they should lead under
uncertainty. Although the emerging research on strategic leadership has included individuallevel factors such as the leader’s personality (Zhu and Chen, 2015), dispositions (Gerstner
et al., 2013; Goleman, 1998), and charisma (Samimi et al., 2020) we omit a discussion of these
personal level factors in this framework. A key presumption of the paper is that the context of
leadership under the “new normal” requires new leadership mindsets, models, and
organizational capabilities. Collectively, these magnify the role of strategic leaders.
We organize the paper as follows to explore the issues. Section 1 of the paper presents the
introduction. The section after that presents the literature review and conceptual framework
of the paper. The third and final section presents a discussion, including the implications of
the paper for research and practice. Figure 1, is a summary of the conceptual framework.
The first dimension of the framework focuses on the need for organizational leaders to
develop new mindsets and accept uncertainty and unpredictability as the new reality.
Conceptualizing organizations as complex adaptive systems (CAS) is an important means for
appreciating the central role of uncertainty and unpredictability in organizational life.
Second, we propose that complexity leadership is more consistent with uncertainty and
unpredictability (Davis and Sumara, 2010). We propose that preparing organizations for
surviving high-impact events requires strategic leaders to adopt new leadership styles that
enable self-leadership, rather than control. Finally, we suggest that organizations need to
develop new organizational capabilities.
The paper contributes to strategic leadership and strategic management literature in
several ways. First, we suggest that strategic leaders need new mindsets for managing in a
period where low occurrence, but high impact events become the norm. This is important
given that most of our existing mental models are built on Newtonian-Cartesian ontologies,
which are unsuitable for managing under uncertainty. Second, the research explores key
capabilities needed for managing under uncertainty. We argue that building higher-level

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

New Mental
New
MentalModels
Models
o

o

New Normal/Challenges

Conceptualize
organizations as
complex adaptive
systems
Adopt nonlinear
thinking and recognize
uncertainty as new
normal

o
o
o

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

Uncertainty
Unpredictability
Frequency of highly
improbable but high
impact events

Reconfiguring Leadership: Complexity Leadership Model
o
o
o

Adaptive leadership
Enabling leadership
Administrative leadership

Reconfiguring Strategic Leadership Responsibilities
Reconfiguring leader functions and tasks
o Building adaptive capacity
o Building robust organizations and systems
o Building resilient organizations
o Fostering self-organization
o Organizational learning
o Sensemaking and sense giving around novel events
Reconfiguring business model design
o Flexibility of business model

Strategic Adaptive Capability
o
o
o

Adaptive leadership
Resilient and adaptive organizations
Delivering customer value under disruptive
conditions with flexible business models

Figure 1.
Conceptual framework

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

capabilities such strategic adaptive capability requires changing fundamental frames of
reference of leaders to match the new normal of uncertainty and unpredictability. Building
the adaptive capacity of organizations, and developing flexible business models amongst
others, is important for dealing with the sort of disruptive and episodic events that are part of
the new normal. Third, the paper proposes that strategic leaders need to develop new
leadership skills centered on uncertainty and unpredictability. Conceptualizing organizations
as complex adaptive systems are important for bringing disorder, uncertainty, emergence, to
the center of leading in uncertain environments. Finally, we extend research on strategic
management, specifically, the role of strategic leaders in managing and developing critical
adaptive capabilities for managing in an age of disruptions.

2. Literature review and conceptual framework
Taleb (2007) first used the term “Black Swan” to describe what he calls highly improbable and
unpredictable events (Mignan et al., 2014) and the corresponding metaphor of a “White Swan”
for predictable events. As Taleb (2007) puts it, people completely accepted the fact that all
Swans were white until they saw the first black swan, showing that sometimes what we know
is only valid until we find new or disconfirming data. Two lessons that Taleb highlights from
this are important: our store of knowledge may prove more fragile than we think and second,
learning from the past has its limits. Indeed, with the low occurrence, high impact events, the
past offers very little guidance for the future and that seems to be the predicament
organizations and business leaders found themselves in during the recent pandemic.
Taleb (2007) summarizes Black Swan events, now a neologism, as having three qualities;
(1) they are rare (2) have great impact, and (3) are predictable only in retrospect, not ahead of
time. There is a close similarity between the Black Swan theory and the sciences of chaos
(Gleick, 1987) complexity, and nonlinear dynamics (Alfoqahaa and Jones, 2020). These
theories have one thing in common: they demonstrate that the ability to make predictions
about nonlinear and dynamic systems is limited. Today, people talk about the “new normal,”
some acceptance that the frequency of these high impact phenomena may be a permanent
feature of our lives and that we had better learn to live with them. We argue here that strategic
leaders need to develop new mindsets and organizational capabilities, more in tune with
uncertainty and unpredictability.
2.1 Defining strategic leadership
There is no universally agreed-upon definition of strategic leadership. Samimi et al. (2020,
p. 3) define strategic leadership as “the functions performed by individuals at the top levels of
an organization (CEOs, TMT members, Directors, General Managers) that are intended to
have strategic consequences for the firm.” Ireland and Hitt (1999, p. 43) define strategic
leadership as “a person’s ability to anticipate, envision, maintain flexibility, think
strategically, and work with others to initiate changes that will create a viable future for
the organization.” Davies and Davies (2004) identified several functions of strategic leaders:
develop an organization’s strategic capabilities; challenge and question the present, and build
new mental models. More importantly, the authors note that strategic leadership “is a means
of building the direction and the capacity for the organization to achieve that directional shift
or change” (p. 244).
These definitions capture the essential nature of strategic leadership. As Boal (2004,
p. 1504) observes, “Strategic leadership is both process-oriented and substantive in nature.”
While these functions are important, strategic leadership under dynamic and unpredictable
environments may require additional, and different functions. Under uncertainty, strategic
leaders may need to build bridges between the past, present, and unknowable future

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

(Boal, 2004; Marion and Uhl-Bien, 2001). To accomplish this requires that strategic leaders
think of organizations in new ways by developing mental models more in sync with the
complex and dynamic environments.

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

2.2 Strategic adaptive capability (SAC)
The role of strategic leaders comes under sharp focus in an environment of great uncertainty
and unpredictability (Waldman et al., 2001). How organizations respond to environmental
changes including market signals is determined, in part by their level of strategic adaptive
capability (SAC). SAC is an outwardly directed capability for managing uncertainty (Zaheer
and Zaheer, 1997). Ma et al. (2009, p. 1087), define strategic adaptive capability as “a firm’s
capacity to sense and respond to environmental changes in a relatively quick and flexible
way.” In the case of episodic changes such as COVID-19, a firm’s ability to sense threats and
opportunities and to create a fit between its internal systems and rapidly emerging challenges
may depend on this capability. Although SAC may be a form of dynamic capability (Teece
et al., 1997), it is a form of higher-level capability (Peteraf et al., 2013). A firm’s ability to sense
events in the environment, and respond quickly to them rests on its strategic adaptive
capability (Zaheer and Zaheer, 1997). We argue that as individuals at the strategic apex of the
organization whose primary responsibility is to manage an organization’s interface with the
macro-environment (Mintzberg, 1983); strategic leaders need to reconfigure their thinking,
and organizations to build strategic adaptive capability for managing and leading in the age
of Swans. Specifically, strategic leaders need to: (1) reconfigure their mental models in line
with unpredictability, nonlinearity, and uncertainty, (2) their leadership approaches to reflect
the complexity of the environment, (3) their internal organizational architecture to promote
strategic adaptability, and (4). Reconfigure their business models to reflect environmental
and strategic dynamism.
3. Reconfiguring leadership to increase strategic adaptive capability
New leadership models may be necessary for managing complexity, uncertainty, and
unpredictability (Wheatley, 1992). We suggest that complexity leadership (Uhl-Bien et al.,
2007) is more suitable for managing in an “era of swans” and that strategic leaders need to
develop new mindsets by (1) thinking of organizations as complex adaptive systems
(2) accepting uncertainty and unpredictability as the new normal (3) and engaging in specific
leader-directed behaviors.
3.1 Organizations as complex adaptive systems (CAS)
One of the most important frameworks needed for leading under uncertainty is
conceptualizing organizations as complex adaptive systems. The notion of organizations
as complex adaptive systems is the foundational idea in complexity theory. Holland (1995)
was perhaps the first to use the term CAS to describe complex nonlinear systems in which
system behavior depends on the behavior of agents that make up the system. Stacey (1996,
p. 10) defines a CAS “as consisting of several active agents, who interact with each other
according to sets of rules that require them to examine and respond to each other’s behavior
to improve their behavior and the behavior of the system they comprise”. Benbya and
McKelvey (2006, p. 18) summarize the key features of CAS: (1) CAS systems are dynamic and
demonstrate nonlinear behavior. Nonlinearity refers to a lack of direct cause and effect.
Causality in nonlinear systems is not direct and unpredictable as small changes can lead to no
effect, or disproportional effects (2) CAS demonstrates self-organization, in which aggregate
behavior emerges from the interaction of the agents in the system. (3) Emergent behavior.
Emergence occurs when new structures and properties emerge as a result of agent interaction

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

(4) Co-evolution is the process by which elements of the system adapt in response to changes
in their environment (Holland, 1995). There are implications of these features for strategic
leadership and these are discussed elsewhere in this paper.
3.2 New mental models
Davies and Davies (2004) identify the development of new mental models as one of the
functions of strategic leaders. Mental models are psychological structures that people use to
categorize their environment and make sense of situations (Weick, 1989). Boal (2004) notes
that one important function of strategic leaders is to serve as a bridge between the past,
present, and future. We argue that developing new ways of thinking may be key to
accomplishing that function, especially since the “new normal” has no precedence from which
we can learn from. Since our world views affect how we act, organizations and their leaders
need to develop mental models more in sync with dynamism, unpredictability, and change.
As Pfeffer (1993) suggested, theories that challenge the conventional view and the taken-forgranted realities may allow us to think about issues in new ways.
Complexity theory and its precursor, chaos theory seem to offer some of the most powerful
tools for building a new understanding of uncertainty and the corresponding organizational
issues, including strategic leadership processes and functions as these theories focus on
complexity, uncertainty, and unpredictability (Prigogine and Stengers, 1984). As an
organizing framework, complexity theory has implications for strategic leadership.
Complexity theory focuses on CAS, emergent behavior, self-organization, and co-evolution
(McKelvey, 2001). A greater understanding of emergent phenomena, including how
organizations may co-evolve with dynamic changes in their environment offers strategic
leaders a better understanding of how to lead, build new organizational capabilities and
prepare their organizations for adapting to new challenges that emerge in an era of swans.
Complexity theory focuses on order and how order emerges from the interaction of selforganizing agents (Kauffman, 1995). A key idea in complexity sciences as Benbya and
McKelvey (2006, p. 17) note is “defining organizations as complex, dynamic, non-linear
systems that do not evolve in a steady, predictable way” (Stacey, 1996). Organizational
researchers have used the theory to understand self-renewal (Nonaka, 1988) and leadership
(Alfoqahaa and Jones, 2020). The same ideas may be useful to how strategic leaders manage
under high uncertainty and unpredictability associated with events such as COVID-19.
3.3 Unpredictability and nonlinear thinking
Traditional strategic leadership theory is focused on hierarchy, stability, and order (Uhl-Bien
et al., 2007). However, nonlinear thinking accepts that change, unpredictability, and chaos are
the rule rather than the exception. Exploring some key characteristics of nonlinear systems
such as CAS may be helpful to our understanding.
First, nonlinear systems transform and exhibit temporary behavior over time with each
transformation, giving rise to a different behavioral regime (Gleick, 1987). Since nonlinear
systems produce changes that are often disproportionate and surprising, it is difficult, if not
impossible, to make a long-term prediction of such systems with any degree of accuracy.
Second, is a system’s sensitivity dependence on initial conditions (SDIC), leading to Lorenz’s
(1963) “butterfly effect”. SDIC has three important implications (1) First is that small initial
changes in a system can have unexpected impacts, much like Taleb’s (2007) Swan events.
(2) Similar conditions can produce completely different outcomes over time, and (3) when one
makes a small error in specifying initial conditions, this small error can be magnified
exponentially over time. Third, nonlinear systems have multiple equilibria (Thietart and
Forgues, 1995). This is important because it sensitizes us not to simply ascribe system
instability to error or a malfunction in the system (Gleick, 1987). Fourth, the possibility of

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

multiple outcome basins exists in nonlinear systems. Fifth, nonlinear systems can change
from one state to the other, namely from order to disorder and vice versa (Nicolis and
Prigogine, 1989). Finally, nonlinear systems demonstrate self-organization and emergence.
Nonlinear dynamic systems have several important implications for managing
unpredictability. First, they demonstrate that unpredictability is a defining characteristic
of dynamic systems. By bringing unpredictability to the core of managerial thinking, these
theories prepare managers to think of their organizations as a nonlinear dynamic system.
Plowman et al. (2007) note that strategic leaders need to accept uncertainty as a reality to be
able to lead in complex adaptive social organizations.
Second, there is a very low possibility of predicting the outcomes of situations. In dynamic
systems, cause and effect are not straightforward because of the possibility of multiple
outcomes and multiple equilibria. Third, there is always a possibility of finding order and
coherence even in systems that appear disorganized and chaotic. Finally, the possibility of
self-organization in nonlinear systems points to the sort of things managers can do to
promote new emergent structures. Developing mental models that are consistent with the
new normal should positively affect orientations towards strategic adaptive capability.
Therefore:

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

P1. Mental models consistent with uncertainty and unpredictability will have a positive
effect on strategic adaptive capability.

4. Complexity leadership
We suggest that strategic leaders need to adopt new leadership models that are consistent
with the “new normal” with its imperatives for adaptation. The emerging concept of
complexity leadership (CL), based on complexity science seems most appropriate as the
leadership model for leading in uncertain and dynamic environments (Wheatley, 1992).
Complexity Leadership Theory (CLT), emerged in response to the leadership challenges of
managing CAS (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007; B€acklander, 2019). CL is a form of shared leadership
where the responsibility of leadership is diffused and not vested in a single individual (Carson
et al., 2007). Uhl-Bien and Arena (2018, p. 89) call this “leadership for organizational
adaptability.” The authors distinguish this from traditional leadership where change is
driven top-down through the vision and inspiration of those at the top (Heckscher, 1994).
Instead, leadership for adaptability focuses on “how leaders can position organizations and
the people within them to be adaptive in the face of complex challenges.” (p. 89). As Uhl-Bien
et al. (2007) observed, traditional leadership theories rely on control and focus on efficiency.
Upper echelons theory (Hambrick and Mason, 1984) relies on bureaucracy to exercise topdown leadership. However, under uncertainty and a dynamic environment, this leadership
model is unsuitable. CL, based on conceptualizing organizations as CAS seems more in tune
with managing under uncertainty. CL has three dimensions Uhl-Bien et al. (2007).
Administrative leadership: The traditional responsibilities performed by the upper
echelons are still necessary since most organizations are bureaucracies. The traditional
functions of planning, control, resource allocation still need to be carried out by those in the
upper echelons. According to Uhl-Bien et al. (2007), leaders who are still dependent on
authority and hierarchy need to modify their approach to stimulate “creativity, learning and
adaptability” (p. 306).
Adaptive leadership: This is leadership that emerges from the interactions among agents in
the organization, creating an emergent phenomenon (Lichenstein et al., 2006). Individuals and
groups may have different objectives and it is the struggles between these conflicting visions
that often generate new ideas and outcomes. There are organizational conditions that
facilitate the emergence of adaptive leadership. Conditions must exist for agents to interact;

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

tension and interdependence are useful conditions. Uhl-Bien et al. (2007) argue that the
outcomes of adaptive leadership are adaptability, learning, and creativity. Since CAS occurs
at every hierarchical level, managers at each level need to develop adaptive mindsets as they
execute their traditional functions.
Enabling leadership: The primary goal of enabling leadership is to provide the
environment for adaptive leadership to flourish as well as manage the conflict between
administrative and adaptive leadership. Uhl-Bien et al. (2007, p. 309) note that enabling
leadership creates the environment for adaptive leadership by fostering (1) interaction
(2) interdependency, and (3) encouraging adaptive tension. Enabling leaders must be careful,
not to let administrative leaders suppress the opportunity for dynamic interaction among
agents, as well as help to protect adaptive leadership from political interference by
administrative leadership (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007). To sum up, complexity leadership is shared
leadership that embraces complexity, and uncertainty and creates the enabling conditions for
employees to engage in self-leadership (Manz and Sims, 1987). Leadership that enhances
adaptability, learning, and creativity should have a positive effect on the development of
strategic adaptive capability. Therefore,
P2. Complexity leadership will have a positive effect on SAC.

5. Reconfiguring leadership tasks, and functions, and organizations to
enhance SAC
Strategic leaders must engage with key leadership functions that are necessary for managing
under uncertainty: (1) sense making and sense giving (2) fostering self-organization (3)
building the adaptive capacity of their organizations (4) building a robust and resilient
organization (5) and foster organizational learning.
5.1 Sense making and giving meaning
Boal (2004, p. 1504) suggests that one function of strategic leadership is to “make sense of and
give meaning to environmental turbulence and ambiguity.” Plowman et al. (2007) found that
strategic leaders in CAS promote self-organizing behavior on the part of employees by
making sense of emerging events. This function of strategic leaders is especially important
under uncertain and unpredictable situations.
Framing an issue and sense giving maybe two important ways in which strategic leaders
make sense of turbulence. The theory of managerial cognition (Walsh, 1995) shows that what
managers notice about an event in the external environment influences how they react to it.
This idea is important for dealing with disruption because such events are novel, and often
contrary to existing ways of knowing, and thinking. This means that the strategic leader’s
skill in diagnosing and categorizing novelty is important. A leader’s worldview is important
(Porac and Thomas, 2002). Framing theories show that how managers frame issues is most
important during periods of uncertainty (Tripsas and Gavetti, 2000). The goal of framing is to
emphasize some aspects of reality, to influence behavior (Meril€ainen and Vos, 2013). Chong
and Druckman (2007, p. 104) define framing as “the process by which people develop a
particular conceptualization of an issue or reorient their thinking about an issue.” According
to the authors, decision-makers form attitudes or beliefs about an event based on certain
attributes and these play a role in how they evaluate the event.
Strategic leaders can frame issues using at least three tactics. One important tactic for
framing may be issue selling. Dutton and Ashford (1993, p. 398) define issue selling as “the
individuals’ behaviors that are directed toward affecting others’ attention to and
understanding of issues.” Issue selling is about how managers determine that an issue is

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

important and has consequences for organizational performance. Second, managers can use
prospective sense-making (Konlechner et al., 2019). Prospective sense making may be very
useful in the early stages of a disruptive event. Sensemaking, the process of understanding
events by looking to the past (Weick, 1995), has informed decision-making in management.
Although helpful, what may be more important is trying to understand events as they unfold,
in other words making sense, not retrospectively, but “prospectively”. Understanding an
event as it unfolds helps decision-makers to figure out what to do. As Friesl et al. (2018, p. 30)
note “prospective sense making involves actors’ engagement with yet uncharted and
unfamiliar trends and provides the opportunity for the prolonged and conscious articulation
and elaboration of tentative interpretations” (Stigliani and Ravasi, 2012, p. 1250 cited in Friesl
et al., 2018, p. 3).
Prospective sense making would be particularly useful at the very early stages of a highimpact event. How managers interpret such an event in the early stages provides an anchor,
although temporary, for stakeholders to begin formulating responses. Such prospective sense
making can serve to calm situations in an organization trying to make sense of a disruptive
event. Of course, effectively using this prospective sense making and framing tactic
presupposes that managers are in tune with the event, cognizant of their prior mental models,
so that past thinking does not dominate how organizations and managers interpret new
events. Finally, managers can frame events, as both a threat and an opportunity. Framing
events as a threat may cause some discomfort to employees and stakeholders. Yet that same
discomfort may be what is needed to disrupt rigid structures and stimulate behavior change
that is required to deal with the effects of novel events. Sensemaking orients an organization’s
attention to identifying and understanding relevant threats quickly. This should have a
positive effect on how the organization responds to environmental disturbances. Therefore,

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

P2a. Sense making and sense giving will have a positive effect on SAC.

5.2 Fostering self-organization
The key lesson from CAS is that leaders cannot rely on traditional control of their followers
through offering a vision to the future as the future is unknown given the uncertainty (Marion
and Uhl-Bien, 2001). Since order can emerge from disorder through self-directed behaviors of
agents (employees and organizational actors), the role of strategic leaders is to act as enablers
(Plowman et al., 2007) under uncertainty. The key role of strategic leaders under uncertainty
then is to provide an enabling environment that fosters self-organization (Maguire and
Mckelvey, 1999).
Self-organization is based on localized control, meaning that individual actors interact
directly with each other in a peer-to-peer manner (Capra, 1996). Interactions between the
entities are also localized, meaning that the behavior of each entity is influenced by the
behavior of its immediate peer instead of entities in the system as a whole. In self-organized
systems, the application of simple rules leads to emergent behavior. Plow et al. (2007) argue
that strategic leaders can foster self-organization by providing simple rules for interaction
(for example when you sense a disruption coming, alert your peers and managers promptly)
and encouraging novelty. The authors note that strategic leaders may need to disrupt
existing patterns that are often rigid to stimulate novel behavior. Marion and Uhl-Bien (2001)
suggest that strategic leaders can serve as cheerleaders to promote emergent behavior. Selforganization presumes self-management and self-leadership (Neck and Manz, 2006) on the
part of employees. Employees need to be motivated but more importantly be empowered to
serve as independent agents capable of engaging in self-directed behavior. Promoting selforganization requires a certain level of democratization and shared leadership would increase
intrinsic self-motivation (Pearce and Conger, 2003). Self-organization enhances self-directed

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

behavior, local action, and emergent behavior, all of which should enhance an organization’s
strategic adaptive capability. Therefore,
P2b. Self-organization will have a positive effect on SAC.
5.3 Adaptive capacity
Preparing an organization for managing under uncertainty requires organizations to build
their adaptive capacity. Jahn and Johansson (2018, p. 162) define adaptive capacity as “a
system’s ability to identify, mobilize, and stabilize response resources throughout a disaster
event.” According to Engle (2011, p. 648), the goal of adaptive capacity is “to maintain a
repertoire of potential solutions to unforeseen problems and unpredictable variations, and
allows for learning and adjustment despite the existence of its unalterable features”. Engle
(2011) argues that adaptive capacity reduces an organizations’ sensitivity (i.e. the extent to
which a system is affected after being exposed to stress) and reduces its exposure (i.e. the
extent to which the system is physically in harm’s way). An organizations’ adaptive capacity
helps to reduce its vulnerability in the event of a shock (Staber and Sydow, 2002; Adger et al.,
2005). Organizations can build their adaptive capacity through at least three main paths.
First, organizations can build redundancy as a way of increasing their adaptive capacity
(Staber and Sydow, 2002). Indeed, Staber and Sydow (2002) suggest that creating redundancy
on tasks can promote adaptive capacity. For example, strategic leaders can diversify their
supply chains to ensure that disruption in one area is compensated for by sourcing from some
other area. Unlike Dole who lost about 25 of its global suppliers, Chiquita was able to deal
with Hurricane Mitch in 1988 because it diversified its supply chain to Australia and West
Africa (Sheffi, 2005).
Second, learning is an important tool for building the adaptive capacity of an organization.
Learning ability is important because it determines how quickly an organization can adjust
its behaviors in the case of a disturbance (Folke et al., 2005). It is important to re-examine
fundamental assumptions in organizations as part of new learning. Questioning existing
values and norms, multiple-loop learning (Pahl-Wostl, 2009), is what promotes an
organizations’ adaptive capacity. Unless learning involves the questioning and possible
alteration of existing values, the organization may fail to adapt.
Finally, the loose coupling can increase an organization’s adaptive capacity. Staber and
Sydow (2002, p. 417) note that a system is loosely coupled “if its elements share few variables
in common or if common variables are weak relative to other factors influencing the
elements.” Coupling is about linkages between the elements of a system, say departments and
divisions. In a loosely coupled system, the various units can adjust their behavior quickly in
response to some perceived threat. Unlike tightly coupled systems, loosely coupled systems
have less central control and this is important for self-organized behavior. It is also easier to
contain disturbances to local areas in a loosely coupled system so that disruptions are
prevented from spreading throughout the system (Perrow, 1984, cited in Staber and Sydow,
2002, p. 418). The benefits of weak ties (Granovetter, 1982) are that they promote the search
for non-redundant information, and that can be critical to new learning and for building
responses to disturbances. On the contrary, strong ties promote conformity, prevent the
development of new ideas (Scott, 1995) and hinder creative thinking (Perry-Smith and
Shalley, 2003) which is what organizations need in a crisis. Adaptive capacity relates directly
to a system’s ability to identify, mobilize, and stabilize response to potential disruptions (Jahn
and Johansson, 2018) and that should positively impact strategic adaptive capability.
Therefore,
P2c. Adaptive capacity will have a positive effect on SAC.

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

5.4 Robustness
Taleb’s (2007) Black Swan theory suggests that robustness can be a bulwark against
disruptions from unpredictable, high-impact events. Ongoing research in supply chain
management has discussed robustness as a tool for managing supply chain risk and
disruption (Durach et al., 2015). Anderies et al. (2004) defined robustness as “the maintenance
of some desired system characteristics despite fluctuations in the behavior of its parts or its
environment.” (p. 7). A robust system can function in the face of both internal and external
stress without losing its basic function. Knowing how organizations build this capability is
important.
First, organizations can build robustness of systems and people to manage disruptions.
Alderson and Doyle (2010, p. 840) describe at least two features of systems that contribute to
their robustness: (1) Promoting the reliability of system components. Carefully examining the
components of the system: whether people, physical systems such as organization structure,
or social systems in the organization. Each of the individual components of the system must
be reliable because a system is only reliable if its components, individually can withstand
disruptions, without losing their functional abilities (2) modularity is another quality of a
robust system. A modular system is one in which we can easily rearrange the components in
response to some disturbance to make them perform better. Loose coupling, rather than the
tight coupling of system components promotes modularity. This must be so because failure in
one module of a tightly coupled system is quickly amplified across the system. The reverse is
true in loosely coupled systems where the failure of one module does not necessarily mean the
failure of the whole system.
Second, organizations can build sensors to promote robustness. Alderson and Doyle (2010,
p. 841) suggest that organizations can use sensors to detect an individual component failure.
Sensors can monitor system performance by detecting individual component failures as well
as identify external threats and disruptions to the system. According to the authors, having
situational awareness of both system components and the environment is important, but of
limited value, unless the system can act on the information and take appropriate action.
Organizations need to identify the most critical components and design protocols to monitor
those systems (Ruhl, 2014). An example of using sensors may be found in High-Reliability
Organizations (HROs) such as aircraft carriers and nuclear plants preoccupied with failure.
Weick et al. (1999) note that HROs are always on guard for anomalies by using sensors. Such
organizations are known to empower and reward people to quickly report all errors as part of
honing the organization’s improvisation skills.
Finally, redundancy can contribute to robustness. Redundancy is a duplication of
function. The idea is that systems with duplicate functions increase their chances of survival
in a disturbance because the failure of the function in one instance leaves other areas to
continue performing the same function. Although redundancy may be inefficient in some
ways, it serves to preserve a systems’ function in the event of disruption because redundancy
promotes multiple response options (Holling and Gunderson, 2002; Adobor and McMullen,
2018). Robustness enhances a system’s capacity to sense turbulence, resist disruption
without losing its integrity. Therefore,

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

P2d. Robustness will have a positive effect on SAC.
5.5 Organizational resilience
In an era of Swans, a system’s capacity for adaptation and transformation may be more
important than its robustness. This is because unpredictable disruptions do the most damage
to organizations. Resilience is about a system’s capacity for adaptation and transformation.
One of the most common definitions of resilience is that of Christopher and Peck (2004, p. 2)
who define resilience as “the ability of a system to return to its original state or move to a new,

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

more desirable state after being disturbed.” The resilience of a system is about a system’s
capacity for readiness, response, recovery, and growth or movement to a new and more
desirable state after a disruption (Hohenstein et al., 2015).
Linnenluecke (2017) suggests that resilience may be an important tool for dealing with
disruptions, and resilience has been discussed in the organizational sciences as a tool for
managing shock and disruption (Bhamra et al., 2011). Lengnick-Hall et al. (2011) define
organizational resilience as the “firm’s ability to effectively absorb, develop situation-specific
responses to, and ultimately engage in transformative activities to capitalize on disruptive
surprises that potentially threaten organization survival.” According to Burke (2005, pp.
634–635), “a resilient organization is characterized by redundancy, the capacity for
resourcefulness, effective communication and the capacity for self-organization in the face of
unanticipated demands”.
Building a resilient organization requires that organizations build resilient individuals,
teams, and organizations because organizational resilience is a multi-level concept (Ma et al.,
2018). Luthans (2002) defined individual resilience as “the capability of individuals to cope
successfully in the face of significant change, adversity, or risk and to ‘bounce back’ from
adversity, uncertainty, conflict, and failure” (p. 702). Organizations can promote individual
resilience by creating an organizational climate in which individuals feel empowered
(Lengnick-Hall and Beck, 2005). A culture that builds optimism and social solidarity also
enhances individual resilience (Ma et al., 2018). Team resilience arises when there is social
support, cohesion, and network ties in the group (Alliger et al., 2015). Organizational resilience
emerges via an upward influence process from individual, and team level resilience.
Organizational resilience is promoted through flexible, adaptive structures, collaborative
leadership, and organizational learning (Seville, 2018). Building intra-organizational trust
also promotes adaptation (Stern and Baird, 2015). The idea here is that resilient organizations
thrive on a culture of preparedness so surprise is not a death sentence (Hamel and
Valikanagas, 2003). Ma et al. (2018) propose three capabilities that can sustain organizational
resilience (1) Cognitive resilience, “the capability with which the organization perceives
changes and interprets unfamiliar situations” (p. 256). Cognitive resilience prepares the
organization for dealing with uncertainty. It is similar to the framing concept discussed
elsewhere in the paper. (2) Behavioral resilience. This refers to the organization’s ability to
develop and implement new ways of doing things in response to a disruption (Lengnick-Hall
et al., 2011) and resourceful organizations have high cognitive resilience (3) Contextual
resilience or an organization’s ability to draw on its storehouse of social capital and mobilize
for quick action in the case of disruption (Ma et al., 2018, p. 256). Organizational resilience
ensures that an organization can deal with disruptions, evolve, and when needed transform in
response to change. Resilience should therefore enhance the strategic adaptive capability of
an organization. Therefore,
P2e. Resilience will have a positive effect on SAC.
5.6 Organizational learning
Learning, both individual and organizational is important for managing under situations of
uncertainty (Schulte et al., 2012). First, there is some consensus that complexity limits the
usefulness of scientific knowledge (Bohensky, 2014) and that learning that relies on existing
mental models is unsuitable for dealing with uncertainty. That type of learning is what has
been called single-loop learning. Pahl-Wostl (2009) notes that organizations and individuals
that use single-loop learning approaches stick to existing mindsets where radical alternatives
are rejected during sense making. Such an approach certainly is contrary to all the norms of
nonlinearity and uncertainty associated with disruptive events. A second and more useful
form of learning is second and triple-loop learning (Argyris, 2001). Double-loop learning is

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

more reflective of the challenges of managing novel situations and uncertainty. Unlike the
single loop, double-loop learning accepts uncertainty as the new reality. Indeed, uncertainty is
seen as an opportunity, not a paralyzing occurrence (Pahl-Wostl, 2009). Multi-loop learning
questions existing mental models and encourages the development of new alternatives
during sense making and new ideas are actively encouraged as part of sense making.
Reframing situations to reflect the realities of uncertainty and unpredictability allows doubleloop learners to develop novel solutions, based not so much on science, but on reflection,
experimentation, and adaptive learning (Carpenter et al., 2001). Finally, is triple-loop learning
which improves further on double-loop learning by developing new worldviews to deal with
novel events. Learning promotes organizational adaptation, and consequently strategic
adaptive capability. Therefore,

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

P2f. Learning capacity will have a positive effect on SAC.

6. Reconfiguring business models (BM) for flexibility and adaptation
Strategic leaders need to focus on their firm business model, an element of organizational
resilience (Buliga et al., 2016). Defined as the architecture for value creation (Chesbrough and
Rosenbloom, 2002) a business model is the framework through which a firm creates and
delivers its value and profit proposition (Teece, 2010). Uncertainty and high impact events
such as COVID-19 can disrupt a business model and the challenge for organizations is to both
manage the impact of uncertainty and disruption on customer value creation drivers and
profit models.
Strategic leaders must focus on their business models as part of preparing organizations
for disruption because business model transformations have a positive impact on
performance (Amit and Zott, 2001). Strategic leaders need to move away from the
traditional notion and mentality which suggests that developing flexible business models is
necessary only in extreme cases of environmental changes and turbulence (Buliga et al., 2016),
as uncertainty and turbulence are now part of the “new normal”. Therefore, building flexible
and robust business models becomes a part of developing organizational resilience (Buliga
et al., 2016).
Organizations can use formal design processes to configure, as well as recalibrate their
business models (Wei et al., 2017). Building a robust model can be useful in managing
disruptions and help build organizational resilience. However, there are limits to a robust BM
(Zott and Amit, 2010). For example, because a robust business model is focused on
consistency and efficiency, it leaves the BM vulnerable to novel disturbances (Wei et al., 2017).
For example, a supply chain associated with an efficient BM may be tightly coupled. Yet,
loosely coupled and modular supply chains that can be quickly reconfigured may be more
desirable under uncertainty. Therefore, building a BM that makes room for experimentation
and redesign, maybe more suitable under conditions of uncertainty (Chesbrough, 2010).
According to Wei et al. (2017), a flexible BM relies on trial and error, encourages learning and
adaptation in responses to changes in the external environment.
Building a flexible business model requires the development of dynamic organizational
capabilities (Teece, 2010). Developing ambidextrous capabilities should promote flexible
business models. Dynamic capabilities enable managers to recognize threats and
opportunities in the environment and adapt their internal systems to deal with such
threats (Teece et al., 1997). As Teece (2010) notes, developing dynamic capabilities is the
central task of strategic leaders. According to O’Reilly and Tushman (2007), a firm must be
ambidextrous to build dynamic capabilities. Ambidexterity refers to the ability to both
manage existing systems and adapt in response to environmental changes. O’Reilly and
Tushman (2007) argue that strategic leaders need to be able to sense changes and see the

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

opportunities to react to them. Related to high-impact events, this means that strategic
leaders need to have plans and processes that allow them to recognize the impact of
disruptions on their customers. It would be important to quickly determine the impact of
events on customer value and profit. Assessing the impact of a disruption and designing
changes in the BM to accommodate the new realities is important. Business model resilience
should have a positive effect on strategic adaptive capability as it confers flexibility and
robustness on the business model. Therefore,
P3. Business model resilience will have a positive effect on SAC.

7. Discussion and conclusions
This conceptual paper offered some ideas for strategic leadership in an era of “swans”. Our
framework is consistent with earlier research showing that strategic leaders have a key role
to play in building adaptive organizations, as well as dynamic capabilities that support the
deployment of flexible business models to ensure the continued value and profit delivery
under conditions of uncertainty, as well as when disruptions occur (Guo et al., 2013; Buliga
et al., 2016).
7.1 Contributions to theory
One reality of the new normal is that strategic leaders and organizations may need new
worldviews more consistent with unpredictability, and uncertainty. For example, to be
successful in the face of significant environmental uncertainty and unpredictability, strategic
leaders may have to develop new cognitive mechanisms and mental models and broaden
their often limited conception of environmental turbulence in terms of changes and shifts in
technology, and demand to include the possibility of novel forms of disruption as they engage
in business model innovation (Guo et al., 2013). The recent pandemic suggests that
environmental turbulence may arise from unfamiliar situations requiring a change of the
logic of the business itself (Teece, 2010), thereby amplifying the role of strategic leadership in
building flexible business models that can be adapted when needed (e.g. Guo et al., 2013).
Traditional theories for managing uncertainty focus on avoiding uncertainty, and search
instead for stability. Leadership theories, including upper echelon theory, similarly seek
control and focus on efficiency. However, these approaches are unsuitable for the challenges
of a dynamic and unpredictable era. Traditional leadership theories may need to evolve to
accommodate a more bottom-up, collaborative approach (Uhl-Bien et al., 2007). Reconciling
traditional and emergent leadership approaches in organizations that are still predominantly
bureaucratic would not be easy, and managing this sort of “entanglement” (Uhl-Bien et al.,
2007) requires new leadership skills. Although complexity leadership is a new concept, it may
help generate new insights about strategic leadership under uncertainty. Ma et al. (2009) link
the nature of a firm’s interpersonal network to its strategic adaptive capability. We extend
this line of research by showing that strategic leader behavior can be an important
determinant of SAC. This finding is consistent with earlier findings on the important role of
the upper echelons of organizations (Hambrick and Mason, 1984).
Taleb (2007) is reported to have observed that COVID-19 was more than a pandemic; that
it is an indication of the nature of the fragile world we face (Avishai, 2020). To the extent that
this is true, it may be an invitation to management and strategy scholars to revisit our
theories as most of these paradigms are based on Newtonian-Cartesian ontology of control,
and certainty as uncertainty and unpredictability are the antitheses of control and prediction.
It was Thomas Kuhn (1970) who suggested that sometimes the most important advances in
the sciences are made when researchers do not follow established methods and criteria. In

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

some sense, those applying new theories to the understanding of strategic leadership in the
age of “swans” may be engaged in “revolutionary science.” Perhaps revolutionary sciences
will offer fresh perspectives to our existing theories of strategic leadership and help our
understanding of strategic leadership under uncertainty.

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

7.2 Contributions to practice
Firstly, we argue that strategic leaders may need to reconfigure their leadership
paradigms for managing disruptions. Leaders need to develop new mindsets, leadership
models, and organizational capabilities for dealing with uncertainty. Indeed, creating an
environment where leaders can emerge from all sorts of places would be an important skill
to have and leaders can accomplish this by enabling self-leadership (Neck and Manz, 1996).
Wheatley (1992) notes that in a time of uncertainty and chaos when people are anxious and
frustrated, leaders should not rely on “emotions of fear and scarcity.” Instead, leaders need
to embrace surprise, offer assurance, and hope. As Rubinstein and Firstenberg (1999, p.
147) put it: “the new leadership requires courage to question the known present. This is
more daring than investigating the unknown future. The new leadership is constantly
challenging norms. Classical leadership can lead to a state of order, but it loses control in
chaos and conflict. The new leadership thrives on leading in chaos and conflict”. Building a
robust, adaptable, and resilient organization would be important. Robustness is important
for initial response capacity, while resilience is needed for transformation to new fitness
levels (Kauffman, 1995).
Secondly, organizations need to build their strategic adaptive capabilities. SAC is a higherlevel capability and therefore requires that strategic leaders focus on organizational systems
that prepare their organizations to be agile, sense, and interpret environmental signals that
buffet their organization, including those that happen infrequently such as COVID-19.
Developing this capability requires that strategic leaders and organizations change their
frames of reference on environmental dynamism. The period of relative environmental
stability may be irrevocably gone and accepting change, uncertainty, and unpredictability as
the new normal requires a mental shift that is consistent with that level of disruption.
Finally, organizations must focus on building adaptive business models. Building the
capabilities for both exploration and exploitation or organizational ambidexterity is an
important means for building flexibility into firm business models. Unless companies can
satisfy their customers, even during disruptions, they face serious problems, even existential
threats to their survival.
7.3 Limitations and future research
This research has some limitations. First, we make no claims of causality, as this is a
conceptual paper. However, the paper offers a list of propositions that can be empirically
tested. Second, the research omitted individual-level factors such as personality, dispositions,
charisma, and emotional intelligence. However, we know that a leader’s dispositions may be a
factor in their behavior (Samimi et al., 2020; Goleman, 1998).
There are several research issues worthy of further exploration. First, the concept of
strategic leadership itself would benefit from further study. The construct presently is
defined simultaneously as an ability, function, and process (Ireland and Hitt, 1999; Davies and
Davies, 2004). Greater conceptual clarity would enhance the usefulness of the construct to
strategy research. Second, future studies can incorporate the individual-level factors in a
framework to explain strategic leadership, given their effect on leadership behaviors (Tripsas
and Gavetti, 2000). Third, how the higher-order concept of strategic adaptive capability
affects disruptive change is another fruitful area for research. Finally, case studies of how
specific strategic leaders led their organizations during the recent pandemic, including how

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

they made sense of this low occurrence but high impact event, would help build a knowledge
base on what strategic leaders should do under such disruptive conditions.
References
Adger, W.N., Hughes, T.P., Folke, C., Carpenter, S.R. and Rockstrom, J. (2005), “Social-ecological
resilience to coastal disasters”, Science, Vol. 309, pp. 1036-1039.
Adobor, H. and McMullen, R.S. (2018), “Supply chain resilience: a dynamic and multidimensional
approach”, The International Journal of Logistics Management, Vol. 29 No. 4, pp. 1451-1471.
Alderson, D.L. and Doyle, J.C. (2010), “Contrasting views of complexity and their implications for
network-centric infrastructures”, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, And Cybernetics, Vol. 40,
pp. 839-852.
Alfoqahaa, S. and Jones, E. (2020), “Leading at the edge of chaos: historical perspectives on the
qualities of leadership for cultural diversity and conflict resolution”, International Journal of
Public Leadership, Vol. 16, pp. 217-248.
Alliger, G.M., Cerasoli, C.P., Tannenbaum, S.I. and Vessey, W.B. (2015), “Team resilience: how teams
flourish under pressure”, Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 44 No. 3, pp. 176-184.
Amit, R. and Zott, C. (2001), “Value creation in e-business”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 22 Nos
6-7, pp. 493-520.
Argyris, C. (2001), On Organizational Learning, 2nd ed., Blackwell Publishers, Malden, MA.
Anderies, J.M., Janssen, M.A. and Ostrom, E. (2004), “A framework to analyze the robustness of socialecological systems from an institutional perspective”, Ecology and Society, Vol. 9 No. 1, p. 18.
Avishai, B. (2020), “The pandemic isn’t a Black Swan but a portent of a more fragile global system”,
The New Yorker, April 21, available at: https://www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/thepandemic-isnt-a-black-swan-but-a-portent-of-a-more-fragile-global-system (accessed 15
May 2020).
B€acklander, G. (2019), “Doing complexity leadership theory: how agile coaches at Spotify practice
enabling leadership”, Creativity Innovation Management, Vol. 28 No. 1, pp. 42-60.
Bar Am, J., Furstenthal, L., Jorge, F. and Roth, E. (2020), “Innovation in a crisis: why it is more critical
than ever”, McKinsey & Company, available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/∼/media/
McKinsey/Business%20Functions/Strategy%20and%20Corporate%20Finance/Our%
20Insights/Innovation%20in%20a%20crisis (accessed 20 June 2020).
Barney, J.B. (1986), “Strategic factor markets: expectations, luck, and business strategy”, Management
Science, Vol. 32, pp. 1231-1241.
Benbya, H. and McKelvey, B. (2006), “Toward a complexity theory of information systems
development”, Information Technology and People, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 12-3.
Bhamra, R., Dani, S. and Burnard, K. (2011), “Resilience: the concept, a literature review, and future
directions”, International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 49 No. 18, pp. 5375-5393.
Boal, K.B. (2004), “Strategic leadership”, in Goethals, G.R., Sorenson, G.J. and Burns, J.M. (Eds),
Encyclopedia of Leadership, SageThousand Oaks, CA, pp. 1497-1504.
Bohensky, E.L. (2014), “Learning dilemmas in a social-ecological system: an agent-based modeling
exploration”, Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 1-25.
Buliga, O., Scheiner, C.W. and Voigt, K.-I. (2016), “Business model innovation and organizational
resilience: towards an integrated conceptual framework”, Journal of Business Economics,
Vol. 86, pp. 647-670.
Burke, R.J. (2005), “Effects of 9/11 on individuals and organizations: down but not out!”, Disaster
Prevention and Management, Vol. 14 No. 5, pp. 629-638.
Capra, F. (1996), The Web of Life: A New Scientific Understanding of Living Systems, Anchor Books,
New York, NY.

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

Carpenter, S.R., Walker, B., Anderies, J.M. and Abel, N. (2001), “From metaphor to measurement:
resilience of what to what?”, Ecosystems, Vol. 4 No. 8, pp. 765-781.
Carson, J.B., Tesluk, P.E. and Marrone, J.A. (2007), “Shared leadership in teams: an investigation of
antecedent conditions and performance”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 50 No. 5,
pp. 1217-1234.

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

Chesbrough, H. (2010), “Business model innovation: opportunities and barriers”, Long Range Planning,
Vol. 43 Nos 2-3, pp. 354-363.
Chesbrough, H. and Rosenbloom, R.S. (2002), “The role of the business model in capturing value from
innovation: evidence from Xerox Corporation’s technology spin-off companies”, Industrial and
Corporate Change, Vol. 11 No. 3, pp. 529-555.
Chong, D. and Druckman, J.N. (2007), “Framing theory”, Annual Review of Political Science, Vol. 10
No. 1, pp. 103-126.
Christopher, M. and Peck, H. (2004), “Building the resilient supply chain”, The International Journal of
Logistics Management, Vol. 15 No. 2, pp. 1-13.
Davies, B. and Davies, B.J. (2004), “Strategic leadership”, School Leadership and Management, Vol. 24
No. 1, pp. 28-38.
Davis, B. and Sumara, D.J. (2010), “If things were simple. . .: complexity in education”, Journal of
Evaluation in Clinical Practice, Vol. 16. No. 4, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2753.2010.01499.x.
Durach, C.F., Wieland, A. and Machuca, J.A.D. (2015), “Antecedents and dimensions of supply chain
robustness: a systematic literature review”, International Journal of Physical Distribution and
Logistics Management, Vol. 45 Nos 1/2, pp. 118-137.
Dutton, J.E. and Ashford, S.J. (1993), “Selling issues to top management”, The Academy of
Management Review, Vol. 18 No. 3, pp. 397-428.
Engle, N.L. (2011), “Adaptive capacity and its assessment”, Global Environmental Change, Vol. 21
No. 2, pp. 647-656.
Folke, C., Hahn, T., Olsson, P. and Norberg, J. (2005), “Adaptive governance of social-ecological
systems”, Annual Review of Environment and Resources, Vol. 30, pp. 441-473.
Friesl, M., Ford, C. and Mason, K. (2018), “Managing technological uncertainty in science incubation: a
prospective sensemaking perspective”, R and D Management, Vol. 49 No. 4, pp. 668-683.
Gerstner, W.-C., K€onig, A., Enders, A. and Hambrick, D.C. (2013), “CEO narcissism, audience
engagement, and organizational adoption of technological discontinuities”, Administrative
Science Quarterly, Vol. 58 No. 2, pp. 257-291.
Gleick, J. (1987), Chaos: Making a New Science, Penguin Books, New York.
Goleman, D. (1998), Working with Emotional Intelligence, Bantam Books, New York.
Granovetter, M. S. (1982), “The strength of weak ties: a network theory revisited”, in Marsden, P.V.
and Lin, N. (Eds), Social Structure and Network Analysis, Beverly Hills, CA, pp. 105-130.
Guo, H., Zhao, J. and Tang, J. (2013), “The role of top managers’ human and social capital in business
model innovation”, China Management Studies, Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 447-469.
Hambrick, D.C. and Mason, P.A. (1984), “Upper echelons: the organization as a reflection of its top
managers”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 9, pp. 193-206.
Hamel, G. and V€alikangas, L. (2003), “The quest for resilience”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 81,
pp. 52-63.
Heckscher, C. (1994), “Defining the post-bureaucratic type”, in Heckscher, C. and Donnellon, A. (Eds),
The Post-bureaucratic Organization: New Perspectives on Organizational Change, Sage,
Thousand Oaks.
Hohenstein, N.-O., Feisel, E., Hartmann, E. and Giunipero, L. (2015), “Research on the phenomenon of
supply chain resilience”, International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics
Management, Vol. 45, pp. 90-117.

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

Holland, J. (1995), Hidden Order, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
Holling, C.S. and Gunderson, L.H. (2002), “Resilience and adaptive cycles”, in Gunderson, L.H. and
Holling, C.S. (Eds), Panarchy: Understanding Transformations in Human and Natural Systems,
Island Press, Washington, DC, pp. 25-62.
Ireland, R.D. and Hitt, M.A. (1999), “Achieving and maintaining strategic competitiveness in the 21st
century: the role of strategic leadership”, The Academy of Management Executive (1993-2005),
Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 43-57.
Jahn, J.L.S. and Johansson, C. (2018), “The communicative constitution of adaptive capacity during
Sweden’s V€astmanland wildfire”, Corporate Communications: An International Journal, Vol. 23
No. 2, pp. 162-179.
Kauffman, S.A. (1995), The Origins of Order, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
Konlechner, S., Latzke, M., G€
uttel, W.H. and H€offerer, E. (2019), “Prospective sensemaking, frames,
and planned change interventions: a comparison of change trajectories in two hospital units”,
Human Relations, Vol. 72 No. 4, pp. 706-732.
Kuhn, T.S. (1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed., The University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Lawrence, P.R. and Lorsch, J.W. (1967), “Differentiation and integration in complex organizations”,
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 1-47.
Lengnick-Hall, C.A. and Beck, T.E. (2005), “Adaptive fit versus robust transformation: how
organizations respond to environmental change”, Journal of Management, Vol. 31 No. 5,
pp. 738-757.
Lengnick-Hall, C.A., Beck, T.E. and Lengnick-Hall, M.L. (2011), “Developing a capacity for
organizational resilience through strategic human resource management”, Human Resource
Management Review, Vol. 21 No. 3, pp. 243-255.
Lichtenstein, B., Uhl-Bien, M., Marion, R., Seers, A., Orton, D. and Schreiber, C. (2006), “Complexity
leadership theory: an interactive perspective on leading in complex adaptive systems”,
Emergence: Complexity and Organization, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 2-12.
Linnenluecke, M.K. (2017), “Resilience in business and management research: a review of influential
publications and a research agenda”, International Journal of Management Reviews, Vol. 19
No. 1, pp. 4-30.
Lorenz, E.N. (1963), “Deterministic nonperiodic flow”, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, Vol. 20,
pp. 130-141.
Luthans, F. (2002), “Positive organizational behavior: developing and managing psychological
strengths”, Academy of Management Executive, Vol. 16, pp. 57-75.
Ma, X., Yao, X. and Xi, Y. (2009), “How do inter-organizational and interpersonal networks affect a
firm’s strategic adaptive capability in a transition economy?”, Journal of Business Research,
Vol. 62 No. 11, pp. 1087-1095.
Ma, Z., Xiao, L. and Yin, J. (2018), “Toward a dynamic model of organizational resilience”, Nankai
Business Review International, Vol. Vol9 No. 3, pp. 246-263.
Maguire, S. and Mckelvey, B. (1999), “Complexity and management: moving from fad to firm
foundation”, Emergence, Vol. 1, pp. 19-61.
Manz, C.C. and Sims, H.P. Jr (1987), “Leading workers to lead themselves: the external leadership of
self-managing work teams”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 32, pp. 106-128.
Marion, R. and Uhl-Bien, M. (2001), “Leadership in complex organizations”, Leadership Quarterly,
Vol. 12, pp. 389-418.
McKelvey, B. (2001), “What is complexity science? It is really order-creation science”, Emergence,
Vol. 3 No. 1, pp. 137-157.

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

Meril€ainen, N. and Vos, M. (2013), “Human rights organizations and online agenda-setting”, Corporate
Communications: An International Journal, Vol. 18 No. 1, pp. 119-134.
Mignan, A., Wiemer, S. and Giardini, D. (2014), “The quantification of low-probability–highconsequence events: part I. A generic multi-risk approach”, National Hazards, Vol. 73,
pp. 1999-2022.

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

Mintzberg, H. (1983), The Structuring of Organization, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Neck, C.P. and Manz, C.C. (1996), “Thought self-leadership: the impact of mental strategies training on
employee cognition, behavior, and affect”, Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 7 No. 5,
pp. 445-467.
Neck, C.P. and Manz, C.C. (2006), Mastering Self-Leadership: Empowering Yourself for Personal
Excellence, 4th ed., Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Nicolis, G. and Prigogine, I. (1989), Exploring Complexity: An Introduction, W.H. Freeman,
New York, NY.
Nonaka, I. (1988), “Creating organizational order out of chaos: self-renewal in Japanese firms”,
California Management Review, Vol. 30, pp. 57-73.
O’Reilly, C.A. and Tushman, M.L. (2007), “Ambidexterity as a dynamic capability: resolving the
innovator’s Dilemma”, Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 28, pp. 158-206.
Pahl-Wostl, C. (2009), “A conceptual framework for analyzing adaptive capacity and multi-level
learning processes in resource governance regimes”, Global Environmental Change, Vol. 19,
pp. 354-365, doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2009.06.001.
Pearce, C.L. and Conger, J.A. (2003), Shared Leadership: Reframing the Hows and Whys of Leadership,
Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Perry-Smith, J.E. and Shalley, C.E. (2003), “The social side of creativity: a static and dynamic social
network perspective”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 28 No. 1, pp. 89-106.
Peteraf, M., Di Stefano, G. and Verona, G. (2013), “The elephant in the room of dynamic capabilities:
bringing two diverging conversations together”, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 34 No. 12,
pp. 1389-1410.
Pfeffer, J. (1993), “Barriers to the advancement of organizational science: paradigm development as a
dependent variable”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 18, pp. 599-620.
Plowman, D., Solansky, S., Beck, T., Baker, L., Kulkarni, M. and Travis, D. (2007), “The role of
leadership in emergent, self-organization”, The Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 18, pp. 341-356.
Porac, J.F. and Thomas, H. (2002), “Managing cognition and strategy: issues, trends, and future
directions”, in Pettigrew, A., Thomas, H. and Whittington, R. (Eds), Handbook of Strategy and
Management, Sage, London, pp. 165-181.
Prigogine, I. and Stengers, I. (1984), Order Out of Chaos: Man’s New Dialogue with Nature, New
Science Library, Boulder, CO.
Rubinstein, M.F. and Firstenberg, I.R. (1999), The Minding Organization, Wiley, New York.
Ruhl, J.B. (2014), “Managing systemic risk in legal systems”, Indiana Law Journal, Vol. 89, pp. 559-603.
Samimi, M., Cortes, A.F., Anderson, M.H. and Herrmann, P. (2020), “What is strategic leadership?
Developing a framework for future research”, The Leadership Quarterly, 101353, doi: 10.1016/j.
leaqua.2019.101353.
Schulte, M., Cohen, N.A. and Klein, K.J. (2012), “The coevolution of network ties and perceptions of
team psychological safety”, Organization Science, Vol. 23 No. 2, pp. 564-581.
Scott, W.R. (1995), Institutions and Organizations, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Seville, E. (2018), “Building resilience: how to have a positive impact at the organizational and
individual employee level”, Development and Learning in Organizations, Vol. 32, pp. 15-18.
Sheffi, Y. (2005), The Resilient Enterprise: Overcoming Vulnerability for Competitive Advantage, MIT
Press, Cambridge.

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

JSMA

Staber, U. and Sydow, J. (2002), “Organizational adaptive capacity: a structuration perspective”,
Journal of Management Inquiry, Vol. 11 No. 4, pp. 408-424.
Stacey, R. (1996), Complexity and Creativity in Organizations, Berrett-Koehler, San Francisco, CA.
Stern, M.J. and Baird, T. (2015), “Trust ecology and the resilience of natural resource management
institutions”, Ecology and Society, Vol. 20 No. 2, p. 14, doi: 10.5751/ES-07248-200214.
Stigliani, I. and Ravasi, D. (2012), “Organizing thoughts and connecting brains: material practices and
the transition from individual to group-level prospective sensemaking”, Academy of
Management Journal, Vol. 55 No. 5, pp. 1232-1259.
Taleb, N.N. (2007), The Black Swan. The Impact of the Highly Improbable, Random House, New York.
Teece, D.J. (2010), “Business models, business strategy, and innovation”, Long Range Planning, Vol. 43
Nos 2-3, pp. 172-194.
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G. and Shen, A. (1997), “Dynamic capabilities and strategic management”, Strategic
Management Journal, Vol. 18 No. 7, pp. 509-533.
Thietart, R.A. and Forgues, B. (1995), “Chaos theory and organization”, Organization Science, Vol. 6,
pp. 19-31.
Tripsas, M. and Gavetti, G. (2000), “Capabilities, cognition, and inertia: evidence from digital imaging”,
Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 21, pp. 1147-1161.
Uhl-Bien, M. and Arena, M. (2018), “Leadership for organizational adaptability: a theoretical synthesis
and integrative framework”, Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 29, pp. 89-104.
Uhl-Bien, M., Marion, R. and McKelvey, B. (2007), “Complexity leadership theory: shifting leadership
from the industrial age to the knowledge era”, Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 18, pp. 298-318.
Waldman, D.A., Ramirez, G.G., House, R.A. and Puranam, P. (2001), “Does leadership matter? CEO
leadership attributes and profitability under conditions of perceived environmental
uncertainty”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 44, pp. 134-143.
Walsh, J.P. (1995), “Managerial and organizational cognition: notes from a trip down memory lane”,
Organization Science, Vol. 6 No. 3, pp. 280-321.
Wei, Z., Song, X. and Wang, D. (2017), “Manufacturing flexibility, business model design, and firm
performance”, International Journal of Production Economics, Elsevier, Vol. 193 No. C, pp. 87-97.
Weick, K.E. (1989), “Mental models of high-reliability systems”, Industrial Crisis Quarterly, Vol. 3
No. 2, pp. 127-142.
Weick, K. (1995), Sensemaking in Organizations, Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.
Weick, K.E., Sutcliffe, K.M. and Obstfeld, D. (1999), “Organizing for high reliability: processes of
collective mindfulness”, in Staw, B.M. and Cummings, L.L. (Eds), Research in Organizational
Behavior, Vol. 21, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 81-123.
Wheatley, M.J. (1992), Leadership and the New Science. Learning about Organization from an Orderly
Universe, Berret-Koehler Publishers, San Francisco.
Zaheer, A. and Zaheer, S. (1997), “Catching the wave: alertness, responsiveness, and market influence
in global electronic networks”, Management Science, Vol. 43 No. 11, pp. 1493-1509.
Zhang, Z., Waldman, D.A. and Wang, Z. (2012), “A multilevel investigation of leader-member
exchange, informal leader emergence, and individual and team performance”, Personnel
Psychology, Vol. 65, pp. 49-78.
Zhu, D.H. and Chen, G. (2015), “CEO narcissism and the impact of prior board experience on corporate
strategy”, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 60 No. 1, pp. 31-65.
Zott, C. and Amit, R. (2010), “Business model design: an activity system perspective”, Long Range
Planning, Vol. 43, pp. 216-226.
Zott, C. and Huy, Q.N. (2007), “How entrepreneurs use symbolic management to acquire resources”,
Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 52 No. 1, pp. 70-105.

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

Further reading
Amit, R. and Zott, C. (2015), “Crafting business architecture: the antecedents of business model”,
Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, Vol. 9 No. 4, pp. 331-350.

Strategy in the
era of “swans”

Corresponding author
Henry Adobor can be contacted at: henry.adobor@quinnipiac.edu

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsma/article-pdf/doi/10.1108/JSMA-09-2020-0242/9774579/jsma-09-2020-0242.pdf by University of Ghan

