The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/0143-7720.htm

The macro talent management,
decent work and national
well-being nexus: a cross-country
and panel data analysis
Alex Anlesinya and Kwesi Amponsah-Tawiah
Department of Organisation and Human Resource Management,
University of Ghana Business School, Accra, Ghana

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

Received 17 March 2020
Revised 4 August 2020
17 September 2020
Accepted 17 September 2020

Philip Kofi Adom
Department of Development Policy, School of Public Service and Governance,
Ghana Institute of Management and Public Administration (GIMPA), Achimota,
Ghana, and

Obi Berko Obeng Damoah and Kwasi Dartey-Baah
Department of Organisation and Human Resource Management,
University of Ghana Business School, Accra, Ghana
Abstract
Purpose – There is a paucity of research on the causal relationships between talent management (TM), decent
work and national well-being. Hence, this study examines the nexus between macro talent management (MTM)
practices, decent work and national well-being.
Design/methodology/approach – The authors employed longitudinal data from 77 developing countries
across the globe and also utilised panel data estimators and the bootstrapping mediation method for the
analyses.
Findings – The results indicated that macro-level TM strategies can have a positive impact on decent work.
Decent work also significantly improves national well-being (both subjective and economic well-being) over
time as it shows a significant positive impact on change in national well-being measures. Furthermore, decent
work serves as a mechanism that links MTM to improved national well-being at the macro level.
Practical implications – TM investments by governments can empower citizens to escape the tragedy of
vulnerable and low-quality employment and well-being deficit as it has the potential to improve decent work
and national well-being as enshrined in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Originality/value – Beyond the myopic organisational and managerialist view, the authors show that TM
can have a positive spillover impact on people and the general society across time by enhancing decent work
opportunities to improve both subjective and economic well-being of citizens in a country. Additionally,
because decent work has psychosocial and economic dimensions, this study has revealed a complex and
compelling conduit for translating the gains of macro-level TM strategies to improve national well-being.
Moreover, it provides original empirical evidence to expand the limited longitudinal TM literature. Lastly, it
adds to knowledge in the developing countries’ context.
Keywords Talent management, Macro talent management, National well-being, Decent work, Developing
countries, Panel data analysis
Paper type Research paper

Introduction
The pursuit of well-being and decent work are considered essential goals for every human
being and nation; hence, their recognition in the United Nations’ Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) 3 and 8, respectively. National well-being is defined as the state of being healthy,
The authors are grateful to the editors of the journal for their support and the three anonymous
reviewers for their constructive comments.

International Journal of Manpower
© Emerald Publishing Limited
0143-7720
DOI 10.1108/IJM-03-2020-0106

IJM

happy, contented and comfortable and satisfied with life within a country (Bryson et al., 2014).
Decent work is a work that guarantees workers’ freedom, equity, security and dignity in
employment relationship (International Labour Organisation [ILO], 1999). Even though the
quests for improved well-being and decent work are pursued globally over the years, they are
still often missing, at least for some people, especially in developing countries, as evidenced in
several reports. Recent reports (see ILO, 2018; United Nations Development Programme
[UNDP], 2018) suggest that developing countries face huge national threat to peace and
security due to the current level of limited opportunities for decent work and low well-being.
Indeed, globally, several millions of people are involved in low-quality jobs and unsatisfying
employments, which do not support a decent work agenda but have harmful effects on
happiness, health and general well-being (ILO, 2018).
Consequently, George et al. (2016) described these issues, amongst others, as grand
challenges faced by our society and need concerted effort for their resolutions through
management research. This is because “decent work and economic growth” (SDG 8) and
“good health and well-being” (SDG 3) are directly relevant to management scholars. This
suggests that the creation of decent work opportunities to improve human well-being can be
realised through leveraging management practices, such as talent management (TM) by
governments. Macro talent management (MTM), in Khilji et al.’s (2015) view, is concerned
with the attraction, development and retention of skilled workers by governments to improve
outcomes for their citizens. MTM strategies can aid in sustaining dignified employment
experience, security and safety of jobs and income to improve well-being of the citizenry.
Accordingly, and in furtherance of George et al.’s (2016) call, our study examines the nexus
between MTM practices, decent work, and well-being in developing countries.
This study contributes to the MTM, decent work, and well-being literature in the following
ways: first, there is scarcity of studies linking MTM to decent work generally and specifically
at the macro and cross-country levels. Cooke et al.’s (2019) systematic literature review of the
academic literature on decent work has demonstrated that macro-level scholarly research
studies on decent work were examined mainly through the lenses of legal, political and
economic theories, with significant disregards for national industrial relations and human
resource management (HRM) theories and practices. Consequently, they made a call for more
research studies on decent work from the industrial relations and HRM perspectives. Thus,
this study provides empirical evidence to bridge this gap. Its findings have the potential to
expand our understanding of the contributions of MTM in developing the working conditions
that can create a sense of decent work at the national level for people.
Similarly, although some prior studies examined decent work variables on well-being at
the micro level (e.g. Qing et al., 2016), there is a lacuna at the macro level of the analysis. This is
significant because most micro-level analyses are limited in scope as they focus on either
certain sectors of the economy or some/particular countries, which may be of interest to the
researchers. Albeit, this helps to get deeper understanding of issues at the individual level, it
is difficult to generalise from such results for the purpose of designing and implementing
national, regional and global policies. Besides, Cooke et al. (2019) posited that “decent work is
not just individual dignity but collective dignity of a nation” (p. 122). Thus, there are major
gaps in the existing empirical TM literature regarding its macro-level consequences. Indeed,
these gaps have been highlighted by recent systematic reviews (see Anlesinya et al., 2019a, b;
Gallardo-Gallardo and Thunnissen, 2016). Thus, this study contributes to empirical TM
research in this regard.
Furthermore, as indicated, while limited studies have examined the link between
industrial relations and decent work (e.g. Cooke et al., 2019), decent work and employees’ wellbeing (e.g. Qing et al., 2016) and HRM and employees’ well-being (e.g. Guest, 2017), there is no
evidence of prior studies examining the mediating roles of decent work in the relationship
between MTM and national well-being at the cross-country level. Absence of such studies will

not permit in developing a better understanding of the possible work mechanisms that can
facilitate the role of TM investments in resolving the grand challenges, specifically the SDGs
on decent work and human well-being. In his cross-sectional study, Sachs (2016) posited that
“we still have many crucial things to learn about the deep sources of human well-being. . .we
should explore more deeply the specific characteristics of work that are favourable or
unfavourable to happiness. . .” (p. 63). Hence, this study contributes to knowledge by
responding to Sachs’s (2016) call for empirical studies in this regard. Thus, our findings on the
mediating role of decent work are novel and can expand our understanding about the process
by which macro-level TM practices can enhance national well-being.
Methodologically, MTM literature is dominated by cross-sectional data and even more
pronounced in mediational TM research. Although mediation models by implication involve
changes over time and intertemporal process, most studies in TM are cross sectional and
hence, the field is in need of longitudinal studies, especially those involving mediation
analyses (see Anlesinya et al., 2019a, b; Gallardo-Gallardo and Thunnissen, 2016). This is
because panel data help with intertemporal dynamics and individualities of entities, which
help to control for omitted and unobserved variables, thereby increasing the validity of the
findings (Zhang and Adom, 2018). Hence, our study provides original evidence to expand the
limited longitudinal TM literature.
More so, TM has been accused for its emphasis on managerialist views, which means that
TM efforts should generate economic value while ignoring the well-being of various actors at
the societal and country levels (Thunnissen et al., 2013). Accordingly, this study has extended
the TM literature by providing empirical evidence to show that MTM practices can equally be
leveraged by governments to improve the human lot beyond financial motives by enhancing
national well-being and creating decent work opportunities for citizens in developing
countries.
The theory and hypotheses
Macro talent management and theoretical foundations
Since TM’s inception in the 1990s, it has become a focus of several practitioner articles but has
in recent times gained significant academic attentions with respect to its conceptualisation
and strategic value mainly at the organisational level (see Collings and Mellahi, 2009; Meyers
and van Woerkom, 2014). While TM at the macro level has become a key strategy agenda for
public sector and non-profit-making organisations, less academic research is devoted to
addressing it due to the overwhelming focus on profit-oriented organisations. However,
recent discourse in the area (see Khilji et al., 2015; Vaiman et al., 2019) has recognised its macro
dimension, which extends beyond the dominant organisational view to embrace TM at the
national levels by governmental institutions across the world.
In this study, we operationalised MTM as a set of policies, programmes and actions that
nations and their institutions implement to promote the attraction of critical talents (workers
with high skill in leadership/top managerial positions and those with mid-skills performing
technical roles), the development of their hidden and manifest talents through investment in
formal education, lifelong learning, training, development and empowerment programmes,
establishment of quality management training institutions and use of social and professional
networks to equip them with vocational, technical and global knowledge skills, as well as
encouraging their retention in order to contribute meaningfully towards the building of their
nations for citizens to live fulfilling lives.
The above operational definition is based on Institut Europeen d’Administration des
Affaires’s (INSEAD) Global Talent Competitiveness Index (GTCI) (see Lanvin and Monteiro,
2019). The GTCI measure is developed based on the principle of workforce differentiation,
albeit it is predisposed more towards the hybrid TM. It focusses on high-skilled (A players)

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

IJM

and mid-skilled (B players) workers only and does not include lower level-skilled workers (C
players) in a country. The elitists or pure exclusive TM focusses only on A players and does
not cover B and C players. It is therefore fair to infer that our operational definition based on
the GTCI lends more towards the hybrid TM perspective.
It is essential to recognise that although our theory and data are at the macro level, the
explanatory mechanism also functions at the micro level. Hence, an explanation of the microlevel processes would be useful because countries are made up of individual citizens (see Felin
and Foss, 2005), especially in the wake of limited macro-level research on the topic. Thus, the
study has leveraged both micro-level theory and research and macro perspectives to explain
the mechanisms in the nexus between MTM, decent and well-being at the macro level.
This study is underpinned by human capital (Becker, 1964) and stakeholder theories
(Freeman, 1984). According to Becker’s (1964) human capital theory, human capital
represents employees’ knowledge, skills, abilities and other competencies. TM is a key
instrument for developing the human capital base of an organisation by making people to
both learn and unlearn skills (Pineda, 2010). Sianesi and Reenen (2003) found that that human
capital investments aside enhancing productivity of people lead to enhancement in general
health levels, improvement in environmental outcomes, social cohesion and civic
participation and reduction in criminal rates. This means that beyond organisational
benefits, human capital accumulation has a spillover effect in terms of general societal
benefits, such as enhanced national well-being. Furthermore, from the stakeholder theory
perspectives (Freeman, 1984), countries have responsibilities to implement strategies that
guarantee workers’ dignity, security and fairness in their employment relationship to
improve decent work opportunities and well-being. Governments have responsibilities
to develop the talents of their citizens and also create decent work opportunities for them to
boost their well-being and their overall satisfaction with life.
Macro talent management on decent work
Management of talents at the macro level can facilitate decent work opportunities through
several channels: first, the development of employability skills is a key channel through
which MTM initiatives can boost decent work in a country. Employability describes the
ability of persons to secure and keep meaningful jobs (Pavlin, 2014; Rothwell and Arnold,
2007). TM initiatives can enhance the employability of unemployed individuals since they
will acquire skills and competencies that can help them to obtain secured and meaningful
jobs. For instance, in The Netherlands, Ybema et al. (2020) empirically found that HRM
practices enhance workers’ employability with regards to increment in skills and knowledge.
Similarly, Pastore and Zimmermann (2019) argued that complementing general education
(school or university education) with job-related training investments can help the
beneficiaries to gain sustainable job in the labour market and reduce their unemployment
propensity. They buttressed this claim by citing the low rates of unemployment in Germany
and Austria, which in their view is attributable to investment in job-related training and
general education.
Second, MTM practices can boost decent work through the creation of more quality jobs.
According to ILO (2008), education, training and lifelong learning are amongst the critical
economic factors facilitating progress towards decent work. Likewise, in George et al.’s (2016)
view, human resource development (HRD) initiatives, such as lifelong learning and
continuous education are necessary for the retraining for new skills so as to provide
opportunities for new skills and entrepreneurship for citizens. This is consistent with the
empirical entrepreneurship training and venture creation literature (e.g. Puni et al., 2018) and
Lanvin et al.’s (2019) findings that the nurturing of entrepreneurial talent by the Chinese
Government was a critical source of their innovation, job creation, competitiveness and
economic growth. Relatedly, MTM can lead to decent work because it enhances the chances of

well-trained and talented individual to land at jobs that are well paying with guaranteed
earnings. This is consistent with economics research intuition and human capital theory that
soft skills have implications for the general economy as well as individual earnings across the
lifespan (Sianesiand Reenen, 2003). Hence,
H1. MTM will have a significant positive impact on decent work at the crosscountry level.
Decent work on national well-being
Aristotle posits that people who live fulfilling lives are individuals who have achieved their
potential with regards to wealth, acquisition of knowledge, healthy life, relationship and
friendship, including other domains of life (Erdogan et al., 2012). Work contributes positively
towards improving the well-being of people (Erdogan et al., 2012; Sachs, 2016). The dignity of
work is critical for well-being as the single biggest part of our working adult lives are spent in
the workplace. Hence, “drudgery and unemployment are shunned; stimulating work and
decent work conditions are crucial for well-being” (Sachs, 2016, p. 58).
Decent work can enhance well-being through the following channels: first, decent work
can improve well-being by guaranteeing people with adequate earning, constant flow of
income and livelihood empowerment to satisfy their financial and economic needs. According
to Erdogan et al. (2012), people derive gratification, especially financial needs for just being in
an employment since unemployment tends to negatively impact on life satisfaction and wellbeing (Pittau et al., 2010). Hence, those in decent work have opportunities to earn adequate
income to meet their financial needs, leading to improvement in their well-being.
Second, job security has been found to positively improve subjective well-being of people
by enhancing their happiness and life satisfaction (Silla et al., 2009) because most citizens
cherish personal security (Warr, 2007) and security of their income. This means that the state
of well-being is expected to be lower amongst vulnerable worker groups, such as casual and
contract workers relative to permanent workers. This is because they have no security of
employment and the fear of non-renewal of their contract and unemployment can be very
stressful, thereby impacting on the well-being of vulnerable workers (i.e. people with decent
work deficits). Third, decent work can boost well-being by making people derive pride from
being in an attractive and prestigious employment. A research study by Redman and Snape
(2006) revealed that power and prestige is associated positively with life satisfaction. Besides,
decent work provides workers with opportunities for participation which in turn improves
well-being. From the above discussion, the following hypothesis is proposed:
H2. Decent work will have significant impacts on national well-being – subjective (H2a)
and economic national well-being (H2b).
The mediating role of decent work in the macro talent management and national
well-being nexus
Micro-level TM research studies have established that TM practices and strategies can
enhance the well-being of individual employees. Marescaux et al.’s (2019) research in Belgium
indicated that developmental HRM practices can enhance happiness and healthy well-being
of employees. A similar result was obtained by Khoreva et al. (2017) in Finland and by
Mensah and Bawole (2018) in the Ghanaian banking sector. Relatedly, Song and Xie (2019)
suggested that employee’s educational levels and green talent can contribute to improving
economic welfare in China. Prior to this, Blackman and Mishra (2010) in their conceptual
paper argued that strategic HRM can enhance the achievement of national happiness in
Bhutan if the country is able to develop people management strategies and capabilities.
Unfortunately, these studies were mainly limited to only micro- or individual-level outcomes

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

IJM

to the neglect of MTM’s roles in enhancing national well-being and happiness generally and
at the cross-country level.
Furthermore, as noted earlier, TM practices can facilitate the creation of decent work
opportunities through various channels, such as equipping the unemployed and vulnerable
with employability skills for secured quality employment and creation of quality job
opportunities (e.g. Khoreva et al., 2017). Decent work, in turn, also contributes positively
towards improving the well-being of people (see Cooke et al., 2019; Sachs, 2016). Decent work
can improve national well-being through earning of adequate and secured income,
satisfaction of financial needs, the pride of being employed in a prestigious job and being
in employment characterised by job security and safety, as well as opportunities for
participation.
This means that decent work can serve as a useful psycho-socio-economic mechanism for
TM strategies of national governments to enhance economic and subjective national wellbeing. Indeed, at the micro level, Anlesinya and Amponsah-Tawiah (2020) have conceptually
established that perceived decent work is a useful mechanism (i.e. mediator) through which
responsible TM practices can enhance employee well-being. This is because responsible TM
practices guarantee employees with secured employment and adequate earnings, which can
positively affect their economic and subjective well-being in terms of satisfaction with life and
affective well-being. However, there is no evidence of prior studies examining the mediating
roles of decent work in the relationship between MTM and national well-being. Hence, using
panel data, we hypothesised that:
H3. Decent work will mediate the relationship between MTM and national well-being –
subjective (H3a) and economic national well-being (H3b).
The hypothesised relationships are summarised in Figure 1 below.

The research methodology
Research design
The study used panel research design to investigate the causal relationship between MTM,
decent work and national well-being at the cross-country level to facilitate generalisation.
Panel regression pools cross-sectional units of observations over several time dimensions to
produce a more informative data and estimates that are more robust than cross-sectional data
and techniques. Moreover, longitudinal data have more variability and permit one to explore
a particular phenomenon more accurately than cross-sectional data (Baltagi, 2005).
Population and sampling
The study’s population is all developing countries. According to the World Bank’s (2019)
classification, developing countries are countries that are within low to upper–middle income
brackets. As noted earlier, the choice of developing countries is motivated by the fact that
many of them are currently facing huge national threat to peace and security due to the
current level of limited opportunities for decent work and well-being deficits. The data were
collected from 77 developing countries across the various regions/continents, which are as
follows: Africa (26); Asia (26), Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) (16) and Europe (10)
(see Appendix). These countries were selected due to data availability. Although the study
focussed on 77 developing countries, their selection across the world with representation
from each of the world’s major regions coupled with their socio-economic characteristics can
facilitate the generalisation of the findings. The study collected secondary data of the study
variables spanning 2013–2018. The base year was informed by the fact that data on MTM
were only available from 2013.

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

Objective well-being

∙

H3a

Macro talent
management

Economic well-being

H2a
Control variables:

H1
Decent work

National
well-being

H2

-

Country size:

∙

Population size

-

Regional effect

∙ Africa
∙ LAC
∙ Asia

H3b
H2b

Subjective well-being:

∙∙

Life satisfaction
Affective well-being

Source(s): Authors’own conceptual framework

Measures
MTM: At the macro level was proxy using INSEAD’s GTCI. It was developed based on the
notion of the attract–develop–retain framework that multinational firms used to strategically
manage their talented employees. Thus, the GTCI describes efforts that countries make to
create suitable environment to attract, develop and retain talented people in a country. Its
sub-elements consist of six pillars, which are computed as the simple arithmetic average of
the scores registered on each of the six pillars. The GTCI focusses on TM commitments or
efforts of countries. As a result, its computation uses macroeconomic and country-level
variables (Lanvin and Monteiro, 2019).
National well-being was measured using subjective (life satisfaction and affective wellbeing) and objective well-being (economic well-being). Our use of both subjective and
objective well-being measures is in response to the view that well-being is a multifaceted
phenomenon that can be captured well with the use of both subjective and objective
indicators (Anand, 2016). Economic national well-being was measured using the log of gross
domestic product (GDP) per capita, and it was sourced from the World Development
Database. According to Dynan and Sheiner (2018), GDP is a very useful measure of economic
well-being despite its limitations. Subjective national well-being: life satisfaction is proxy using
Life Ladder from the World Database of Happiness. Ngamaba et al.’s (2017) meta-analysis
results indicated that life satisfaction provides a valid and reliable measure of subjective wellbeing. Affective/emotional well-being was measured using the positivity ratio. It is computed
as the ratio of positive affect to negative affect. Data on both positive and negative affects

Figure 1.
The conceptual
framework of the
macro talent
management, decent
work and national
well-being nexus

IJM

were collected in the Gallup World Poll and were extracted from the World Database of
Happiness. Prior studies (e.g. Diener et al., 2006) have indicated that self-reported well-being
correlated significantly with objective indicators of well-being, such as material living
standard. Moreover, statistically robust subjective well-being measures can provide useful
insights through models, rankings and predictions that would be very difficult to ascertain
by concentrating completely on objective measures (Anand, 2016). It is also necessary to note
that the subjective well-being variables were measured at the individual level and
consequently aggregated to measure subjective well-being at the national level. Hence, the
subjective well-being data in the World Database of Happiness are macro/ country- level data
and not individual- or organizational-level data.
Decent work was proxy by wage and salaried workers as a percentage of total employment
(that is, total number of permanent employees). Wage and salaried (or permanent) employees
have guaranteed earnings, stability and security of employment and have better voice
relative to non-salaried workers. It thus, addresses the key dimensions of decent work, such
as job security, job safety, freedom and dignity in employment. The data on decent work
measure were collected from the World Bank Group’s DataBank and ILOSTAT database.
Control variables: The study controlled for the regional effect and country size as these
factors can impact on well-being and decent work. Population was used to proxy country size
because natural and human resource endowment can significantly account for country
differences in the well-being of citizens. Population size is measured by the log of total
number of residents in a country irrespective of their citizenship and legal status and was
sourced from the World Bank database. Likewise, an ANOVA analysis showed that there are
significant regional differences in national well-being; hence, we controlled for regional
effects. Regional effects are measured using regional dummies. The regional dummies were
coded as follows: Africa region 5 1 and 0 5 otherwise; LAC 5 1 and 0 5 otherwise; Asia 5 1
and 0 5 otherwise, using Europe as the reference region.
The data analysis
Panel regressions techniques were employed to test the hypothesised relationships over the
cross-sectional analytical technique to make the findings more robust (Baltagi, 2005). Fixedeffects models are used to analyse time-variate variables (e.g. age, country size, etc.) and cannot
be used to analyse time-invariant variables (e.g. gender, regional dummy, etc.). However,
random-effects models have the capacity to integrate both time-constant and time-variate
variables in a model. Moreover, the random-effects model is a generalised least square
estimator, while the fixed-effect model is an ordinary least square (OLS) estimator. Thus,
comparatively, the variances of the coefficients in the random-effect model are likely to be lower
compared with those of the fixed-effect model. In other words, the random-effect model is more
robust to heteroscedasticity and produces efficient estimators. The Hausman test is a statistical
technique that is used to determine the suitability of fixed-effects and the random-effects panel
regressions (Baltagi, 2005). But beyond the Hausman test, consideration is also given to other
factors such as, the nature of the data in choosing between both estimators (Greene, 2012).
Moreover, the mediation hypothesis was tested using the bootstrapping method of the
mediation analysis with the aid of Hayes’ PROCESS macro technique. The bootstrapping
method of the mediation analysis is more powerful and highly accurate compared to other
methods of estimating mediation, such as the causal-effect method due to its ability to handle
type-1 error and also to test the significance of the indirect (mediated) effects (Hayes, 2013).
Results and findings
Preliminary analyses and model diagnostics
The Hausman test showed that the random-effect model is suitable (chi-square 5 0.385,
p 5 0.535, >0.05) for estimating the impact of MTM on decent work. Beyond this, the

characteristic of the data, which includes important dummies (time-invariant variables) for
capturing regional effects, supports the choice of the random-effect model over the fixedeffect model. Table 1 shows the correlation analysis. MTM correlates positively and
significantly with life satisfaction (r 5 0.41, p < 0.01), affective (r 5 0.22, p < 0.01) and
economic well-being (r 5 0.67, p < 0.01) and decent work (r 5 0.63, p < 0.01). Decent work
similarly correlates positively with life satisfaction (r 5 0.43, p < 0.01) and economic wellbeing (r 5 0.65, p < 0.01) but has insignificant positive association with affective well-being.
Overall, the independent variables are weakly correlated; hence, no multicollinearity issues.
Hypotheses testing
The first hypothesis states that macro MTM will have a significant positive impact on decent
work. This hypothesis is tested using the pooled OLS and random-effect panel estimators and
the results shown in Table 2. The pooled OLS results indicate that MTM has a positive impact
on decent work in model 1 (β 5 62.507, p < 0.01), where no control variable is included and
remained significantly positive in model 2 (β 5 61.100, p < 0.01) even when country size is
controlled and in model 3 (β 5 52.402, p < 0.01) when both regional effects and country size
are controlled for. Similarly, the random-effect results in all the three alternative models
indicate that MTM has a positive impact on decent work, although the result is statistically
insignificant.
Second, the study hypothesised that decent work will have a significant positive impact on
national well-being (subjective and economic well-being). To analyse this, the study first
transformed the national well-being by calculating change in national well-being measures
(i.e. differences between current well-being and its lag – i.e. previous year well-being) or (wellbeingi,t– well-beingi,t – 1) as well-being is generally malleable. This approach is also robust
against potential problems of endogeneity. Second, we constructed a composite national wellbeing index (which composes of subjective – life satisfaction – and economic well-being),
using principal component and factor analyses. We consequently tested the effect of decent
work on change in national well-being measures (facets and index), using random-effect panel
regression and present the results in Table 3. The random-effect results indicate that decent
work has a significant positive impact on change in life satisfaction (β 5 0.037, p < 0.01),
change in economic well-being (β 5 0.390, p < 0.01) and change in composite national wellbeing (β 5 0.501, p < 0.01). Similarly, although insignificant, decent work has a positive effect
on change in affective well-being (β 5 0.025, p > 0.05). This means that decent work generally
can enhance national well-being (both subjective and economic well-being) across time.
The third hypothesis states that decent work will mediate the relationship between MTM
and national well-being (economic and subjective). The results are shown in Table 4. The
empirical evidence suggests that MTM has a significant indirect (or mediated) effect through
decent work on life satisfaction (ab 5 0.189, p < 0.05), economic well-being (ab 5 0.383,
p < 0.05) and the NWB index (ab 5 0.208, p < 0.05), but shows an insignificant indirect effect
on affective well-being via decent work (ab 5 0.026, p > 0.05).
Discussion
Given the paucity of research on the causal relationships between MTM, decent work and
national well-being generally and specifically at the cross-country level, this study examined
the nexus between MTM practices, decent work and national well-being in developing
countries’ context as they are currently facing major issues with well-being and decent work
deficits. Our study first argues that MTM practices will lead to improvement in decent work
in developing countries. The panel data results indicate that MTM can have a positive impact
on the level of decent work. This means that nations that prioritise policies to attract, develop

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

Table 1.
Pearson’s correlation
and multicollinearity
Mean

SD

1

2

3

4

1. Life satisfaction
5.03
0.92
1.00
2. Affective well-being
0.92
0.35
0.19***
1.00
3. Economic well-being
8.80
0.96
0.57***
0.07
1.00
4. Decent work
50.57
21.93
0.43***
0.07
0.65***
1.00
5. MTM
36.79
7.06
0.41***
0.22***
0.67***
0.63***
6. The African region
0.34
0.47
0.51***
0.01
0.54***
0.41***
7. The Asian region
0.34
0.47
0.02
0.001
0.15***
0.04
8. The LAC region
0.19
0.40
0.55***
0.11**
0.21***
0.18***
Country size
16.65
1.66
0.01
0.10**
0.06
0.17***
0.15***
Note(s): *, **, ***significant at 10 (0.10)%, 5 (0.05) and 1 (0.01)%, respectively; MTM 5 macro talent management

Variables

1.00
0.42***
0.13**
0.05
0.03

5

1.00
0.51***
0.35***
0.21***

6

1.00
0.35***
0.12**

7

1.00
1.00

8

IJM

Pooled OLS regression results
1
2
3

Random-effects regression results
4
5
6

Log MTM

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

62.507***
61.100***
52.402***
2.046
1.766
1.111
(6.08)
(5.89)
(4.54)
(1.24)
(1.07)
(0.69)
Africa
16.998**
35.637***
( 2.42)
( 5.75)
Asia
16.482***
24.603***
( 3.18)
( 3.92)
LAC
8.545*
15.048**
( 1.73)
( 2.25)
Log country size
1.081
0.249
1.282
0.060
( 1.03)
( 0.23)
( 1.10)
( 0.05)
Table 2.
2
0.383
0.391
0.465
0.383
0.076
0.257
R
Panel regression
F-test/Wald chi-square
36.97***
19.68***
12.38***
1.54
2.67
40.48*** results of the effects of
Observation
382
382
381
382
382
381
macro talent
Note(s): *, **, ***significant at 10 (0.10)%, 5 (0.05) and 1 (0.01)%, respectively. t-values are in parenthesis;
management on
unstandardised coefficients from Stata, version 15, are reported; MTM 5 macro talent management
decent work

Δ (Life
satisfaction)

Δ (Affective wellbeing)

Δ (Economic wellbeing)

Δ (Composite NWB
index)

0.709**
0.167**
0.477***
0.575**
( 13.72)
( 6.04)
( 10.12)
( 11.55)
0.037**
0.025
0.390***
0.501***
(2.00)
(1.19)
(4.73)
(5.09)
Africa
0.134***
0.023
0.355***
0.537***
( 4.16)
( 0.62)
( 2.76)
( 3.44)
Asia
0.035
0.043
0.082
0.123
( 1.27)
( 1.31)
( 0.74)
( 0.93)
LAC
0.093***
0.005
0.065
0.003
(3.14)
( 0.16)
( 0.57)
( 0.02)
0.020
0.028
Log country size
0.006
3.7 3 10–5
(1.15)
( 0.01)
(0.94)
(1.10)
2
0.364
0.119
0.237
0.289
R
Wald chi-square
189.61***
44.86***
102.44***
133.51***
Table 3.
Observation
338
338
336
336
Random regression
Note(s): *, **, ***significant at 10 (0.10)%, 5 (0.05) and 1 (0.01)%, respectively. t-values are in parenthesis; results of the effect of
NWB 5 national well-being; unstandardised coefficients from STATA, version 15, are reported; decent work on change
Well-being(t 1) 5 previous year well-being (corresponding facets and index); MTM 5 macro talent management in national well-being
Well-being (t 1)
(log)
Log decent work

Path/relationship

Indirect (mediated)

95% confidence level (C.I)
Effect boot LC.I
Boot UC.I

Log MTM > Decent work > Life satisfaction
0.189**
0.088
0.468
Log MTM > Decent work > Affective well-being
0.026
0.034
0.071
Log MTM > Decent work > Economic well-being
0.383**
0.220
0.909
Table 4.
Log MTM > Decent work > NWB index
0.208**
0.115
0.481
The bootstrapping test
Note(s): ** bootstrap estimate is significant at 95% confidence level (or 5% level of significance); affective
of mediation at 95%
and economic well-being are logged. Also, country size and regional effects are controlled for in all the
confidence
mediation models; MTM 5 macro talent management
intervals (C.I)

IJM

and retain their talented people can create opportunities for their citizens to be engaged in
decent work. This is because the development of people’s talents tends to afford them with
opportunities to become more employable, experience job security, stability of income and
dignity in employment through acquisition of capabilities and skills that facilitate their
ability to secure and maintain permanent jobs. Another possible explanation for our results is
that MTM practices can enhance decent work opportunities through increased availability of
quality jobs, especially if the MTM initiatives emphasise more the development of
entrepreneurial skills and retention of entrepreneurial talents. This is because MTM can
ensure that countries are endowed with well-qualified and talented people to develop
innovative, creative ideas and initiatives that can potentially create more quality, secured and
stable employment opportunities. Our findings, therefore, give credence to the assertion by
some scholars (e.g. Anlesinya and Amponsah-Tawiah, 2019; Ybema et al., 2020) that TM
plays crucial roles in increasing employability skills by developing capabilities and human
capital or resources. It similarly supported George et al.’s (2016) view that HRD initiatives can
boost opportunities for new skills and entrepreneurship development.
Furthermore, we hypothesised that decent work will have a significant positive impact on
national well-being. The empirical results establish that decent work can improve national
well-being – both subjective and economic well-being. This finding indicates that decent
work can improve well-being by guaranteeing people with constant flow of income and
empowerment of their livelihood, leading to the satisfaction of their financial needs and
economic gratifications. This is in line with prior scholars assertion that (e.g. Erdogan et al.,
2012) people derive gratification for just being in an employment. Aside, this result as noted
earlier can be explained based on security of employment feature of a decent work as most
citizens cherish personal security (Warr, 2007) and security of their income. The positive
impact of decent work on well-being could further be due to the sense of pride that is
associated with being in an attractive and prestigious employment. Thus, people who derive
pride from their job, earn adequate and secured earnings from employment and are
guaranteed job security and job safety stand greater chance of experiencing fulfilling lives
compared to individuals who are engaged in vulnerable and precarious employment.
Moreover, the empirical evidence indicates that it is possible for decent work to mediate
the nexus between MTM and national well-being. This means that MTM can enhance decent
work, which will in turn improve national well-being. Hence, decent work is a useful
mechanism for MTM strategies in developing countries to enhance economic and subjective
well-being. This could mean that MTM improves decent work by promoting increased
quality job creations through entrepreneurial talents and by enhancing security of job and
adequacy of income for talented individuals in their employment relationship. People with
more decent work opportunities in turn experience improvement in their life satisfaction and
economic status, hence leading to enhanced well-being. This empirical evidence gives
credence to Anlesinya and Amponsah-Tawiah’s (2020) theoretical assertion that decent work
can mediate the effect of responsible TM practices and well-being, although they focussed on
a micro level of analysis, while our study examined the mediation at the macro and crosscountry levels.
Implications and conclusion
Implications
The study’s findings have major theoretical and practical implications. Theoretically, the
findings have highlighted the contributions of TM at the macro level in developing working
conditions that can create a sense of decent work at the national level for the citizenries.
Moreover, findings have extended human capital theory by showing an important link
between TM initiatives and national well-being via decent work, which goes beyond the

traditional application of human capital theory to understand the competitiveness and
economic gains of firms and nations. This implies that beyond the myopic managerialist
view, TM initiatives tend to have positive spillover impacts on people and the general society.
This can help stakeholders and researchers in the field to appreciate the fact that TM should
not be implemented because of its economic outcomes but its wider social impacts. Similarly,
we further extend stakeholder theory to the TM literature by demonstrating that
governments have responsibilities to implement TM strategies to guarantee workers’
dignity, security and fairness in their employment relationship to improve decent work
opportunities and national well-being.
In addition, by investigating and supporting decent work as a mechanism in the MTM and
national well-being nexus, we add to knowledge in the TM field by identifying a novel mechanism
or process through which MTM practices can result in improved national well-being. The results
mean that developing countries’ citizens, whose talents are well developed, are more predisposed
to have access to decent works in forms of better paid jobs, job security and prestigious job, which
subsequently will lead to enhancement in economic and subjective national well-being. Moreover,
because decent work has economic (e.g. adequacy and security of income), physical (e.g. safety
and absence of threats to life) and psychological (e.g. sense of pride and job security) dimensions,
our study has revealed a complex and powerful conduit for translating the gains of MTM
initiatives to make citizens live fulfilling lives. In so doing, we have extended Anlesinya and
Amponsah-Tawiah’s (2020) theoretical mediation analysis of responsible TM, decent work and
well-being at employee and organisational levels to the macro level.
Practically, the results imply that the creation of decent work opportunities to improve
human well-being can be realised by leveraging effective MTM strategies. The results, thus,
suggest that the importance of dignified or decent work in enhancing well-being in
developing countries, which are battling with high rates of vulnerable employments, cannot
be overemphasised, especially as most of our working lives are spent in the workplace. This
result, therefore, imposes a major responsibility on national governments, policymakers and
their institutions to re-examine the conditions in their countries and initiate actions that will
transform the pace of quality job creations. In particular, as our findings have revealed,
national governments can help to improve decent work as enshrined in the goal 8 of the SDGs
by implementing MTM strategies to develop the workforce to create more decent work
opportunities to improve national well-being. This is because such initiatives have the
potential to guarantee workers’ dignity, security and stability of income and job in their
employment relationship, which in turn leads to an enhanced well-being. Besides, private
sector institutions that have a track record of creating more decent works should be
supported through tax incentives and other supports. Likewise, TM initiatives should
emphasise the ability of the beneficiaries to create decent work for themselves and employ
those in vulnerable employment.
The following are potential limitations to the findings: first, the study has focussed on only
developing countries. Besides, although regional dummies are controlled, our study has not
comparatively examined regional dynamics in the results in terms of how MTM affects
decent work and decent works’ impact on well-being across the different regions. This is a
useful direction for future research. Such studies may go beyond developing countries to
examine comparative difference in the results with respect to developed and developing
nations. Again, the number of countries can be increased once there are sufficient data on
many other countries in the future.
Conclusion
In conclusion, our study implies that MTM investments by national governments can
empower citizens to escape the tragedy of vulnerable and low-quality employment and

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

IJM

well-being deficits. Hence, developing countries can leverage MTM investments to improve
decent work and national well-being as enshrined in the SDGs. Consequently, the major
scientific contributions of this study are summarised as follows: first, it contributes
innovative and original evidence on the nexus between MTM, decent work and national wellbeing at the cross-country level as there is a lacuna at the macro level on the topic. Second,
empirical analyses of TM and its outcomes have overemphasised cross-sectional data to the
neglect of longitudinal design, despite the widely known challenges that are associated with
the classical cross-sectional analysis relative to the panel data analysis. Hence, this study is
novel by providing panel data and longitudinal mediation evidence to expand and bridge the
gap between cross-sectional and longitudinal empirical TM literature as well as responding to
the incessant calls for longitudinal TM research, particularly in mediational TM research.
Thus, a key unique scientific contribution of our study is that the nexus between MTM,
decent work and national well-being varies across time. This certainly is a major insight for
policymakers and governmental institutions in their efforts towards achieving the SDGs on
decent work and well-being.
Third, because decent work has psychosocial and economic dimensions, our study has
revealed a complex and useful work mechanism through which MTM strategies can improve
both subjective and economic national well-being. Fourth, it provides macro-level evidence to
extend the application of human capital and stakeholder theories beyond their individual and
organisational foci to enhance understanding of the positive gains of MTM practices on
decent work and national well-being as well as decent work’s role in enhancing national wellbeing facets. Fifth, due to the general limited representation of emerging and developing
countries in management scholarship, this study adds to knowledge in the developing
countries’ context in the area by highlighting novel management strategies for resolving the
grand societal challenges of well-being and decent work deficits.

References
Anand, P. (2016), Happiness, Well-Being and Human Development: The Case for Subjective Measures,
UNDP Human Development Report Office, New York.
Anlesinya and Amponsah-Tawiah, A.K. (2020), “Towards a responsible talent management model”,
European Journal of Training and Development, Vol. 44 Nos 2/3, pp. 279-303, doi: 10.1108/EJTD07-2019-0114.
Anlesinya, A., Dartey-Baah, K. and Amponsah-Tawiah, K. (2019a), “Strategic talent management
scholarship: a review of current foci and future directions”, Industrial and Commercial Training,
Vol. 51 No. 5, pp. 299-314.
Anlesinya, A., Dartey-Baah, K. and Amponsah-Tawiah, K. (2019b), “A review of empirical research on
global talent management”, FIIB Business Review, Vol. 8 No. 2, pp. 147-160.
Baltagi, B.H. (2005), Econometric Analysis of Panel Data, John, New York.
Becker, G.S. (1964), Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to
Education, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Blackman, D., O’Flynn, J. and Mishra, D.P. (2010), “Can strategic human resource management enable
gross national happiness?”, International Journal of Commerce and Management, Vol. 20 No. 3,
pp. 232-245.
Bryson, A., Forth, J. and Stokes, L. (2014), Does Worker Wellbeing Affect Workplace Performance,
Department for Business Innovation and Skills, London.
Collings, D.G. and Mellahi, K. (2009), “Strategic talent management: a review and research agenda”,
Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 19 No. 4, pp. 304-313.

Cooke, F.L., Xu, J. and Bian, H. (2019), “The prospect of decent work, decent industrial relations and
decent social relations in China: towards a multi-level and multi-disciplinary approach”,
International Journal of Human Resource Management, Vol. 30 No. 1, pp. 122-155.
Diener, E., Lucas, R.E. and Scollon, C.N. (2006), “Beyond the hedonic treadmill: revising the adaptation
theory of well-being”, American Psychologist, Vol. 61 No. 4, pp. 305-14.
Dynan, K. and Sheiner, L. (2018), GDP as a Measure of Economic Well-Being, Work. Paper, 43.
Erdogan, B., Bauer, T.N., Truxillo, D.M. and Mansfield, L.R. (2012), “Whistle while you work: a
review of the life satisfaction literature”, Journal of Management, Vol. 38 No. 4,
pp. 1038-1083.
Felin, T. and Foss, N.J. (2005), “Strategic organization: a field in search of micro-foundations”, Strategic
Organization, Vol. 3 No. 4, pp. 441-455.
Freeman, R.E. (1984), Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach, Pitman, Boston.
Gallardo-Gallardo, E. and Thunnissen, M. (2016), “Standing on the shoulders of giants? A critical
review of empirical talent management research”, Employee Relations, Vol. 38 No. 1,
pp. 31-56.
George, G., Howard-Grenville, J., Joshi, A. and Tihanyi, L. (2016), “Understanding and tackling societal
grand challenges through management research”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 59
No. 6, pp. 1880-1895.
Greene, W.H. (2012), Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Guest, D. (2017), “Human resource management and employee well-being: towards a new analytic
framework”, Human Resource Management Journal, Vol. 27, pp. 22-38.
Hayes, A.F. (2013), Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis: A Regression- Based
Approach, Guilford Publications, New York, NY.
ILO (1999), Decent Work, Report of the Director-General to the ILC, 87th Session, p. 3.
ILO (2008), Measurement Of Decent Work- Discussion Paper for the Tripartite Meeting of Experts on
the Measurement of Decent work.Geneva, 8–10 September 2008, ILO, Geneva.
ILO (2018), Decentwork and the Sustainable Development Goals: A Guidebook on Sdg Labour Market
Indicators, ILO Department of Statistics (STATISTICS), Geneva.
Khilji, S.E., Tarique, I. and Schuler, R.S. (2015), “Incorporating the macro view in global talent
management”, Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 25 No. 3, pp. 236-248.
Khoreva, V., Vaiman, V. and Zalk, M.V. (2017), “Talent management practice effectiveness:
investigating employee perspective”, Employee Relations, Vol. 39 No. 1, pp. 19-33.
Lanvin, B. and Monteiro, F. (2019), The Global Talent Competitiveness Index 2019: Entrepreneurial
Talent and Global Competitiveness, INSEAD, the Adecco Group, and Tata Communications,
Fontainebleau.
Lanvin, B., Monteiro, F. and Bratt, M. and INSEAD (2019), “Entrepreneurial talent for
competitiveness”, The Global Talent Competitiveness Index 2019. Entrepreneurial Talent and
Global Competitiveness, INSEAD, The Business School of the World, pp. 3-36.
Marescaux, E., De Winne and Forrier, S.A. (2019), “Developmental HRM, employee well- being and
performance: the moderating role of developing leadership”, European Management Review,
Vol. 16 No. 2, pp. 317-331.
Mensah, J.K. and Bawole, J.N. (2018), “Testing the mediation effect of person-organisation fit on the
relationship between talent management and talented employees’ attitudes”, International
Journal of Manpower, Vol. 39 No. 2, pp. 319-333.
Meyers, M.C. and van Woerkom, M.V. (2014), “The influence of underlying philosophies on talent
management: theory, implications for practice, and research agenda”, Journal of World
Business, Vol. 49, pp. 192-203.

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

IJM

Ngamaba, K.H., Panagioti, M. and Armitage, C.J. (2017), “How strongly related are health status and
subjective well-being? Systematic review and meta-analysis”, The European Journal of Public
Health, Vol. 27 No. 5, pp. 879-885.
Pastore, F. and Zimmermann, K.F. (2019), “Understanding school-to-work transitions”, International
Journal of Manpower, Vol. 40 No. 3, pp. 374-378.
Pavlin, S. (2014), “The role of higher education in supporting graduates’ early labour market careers”,
International Journal of Manpower, Vol. 35 No. 4, pp. 576-590.
Pineda, P. (2010), “Evaluation of training in organizations: a proposal for an integrated model”, Journal
of European Industrial Training, Vol. 34 No. 7, pp. 673-693.
Pittau, M.G., Zelli, R. and Gelman, A. (2010), “Economic disparities and life satisfaction in European
regions”, Social Indicators Research, Vol. 96 No. 2, pp. 339-361.
Puni, A., Anlesinya, A. and Korsorku, P.D.A. (2018), “Entrepreneurial education, self-efficacy and
intentions in Sub-Saharan Africa”, African Journal of Economic and Management Studies,
Vol. 9 No. 4, pp. 492-511.
Qing, T., Liu, S. and Wang, T. (2016), “The relationship between decent work and engagement: role of
intrinsic motivation and psychological needs”, Journal of Sichuan University (Social Science
Edition), Vol. 5, pp. 134-143.
Redman, T. and Snape, E. (2006), “The consequences of perceived age discrimination amongst older
police officers: is social support a buffer?”, British Journal of Management, Vol. 17 No. 2,
pp. 167-175.
Rothwell, A. and Arnold, J. (2007), “Self-perceived employability: development and validation of a
scale”, Personnel Review, Vol. 36 No. 1, pp. 23-41.
Sachs, J.D. (2016), “Happiness and sustainable development: concepts and evidence”, in Helliwell, J.,
Layard, R. and Sachs, J. (Eds), World Happiness Report 2016 Update, Sustainable Development
Solutions Network, New York, Vol. 1, pp. 56-65.
Sianesi, B. and Reenen, J.V. (2003), “The returns to education: macroeconomics”, Journal of Economic
Surveys, Vol. 17 No. 2, pp. 157-200.
Silla, I., De Cuyper, N., Gracia, F.J., Peiro, J.M. and De Witte, H. (2009), “Job insecurity and well-being:
moderation by employability”, Journal of Happiness Studies, Vol. 10 No. 6, pp. 739-751.
Song, M. and Xie, Q. (2019), “How does green talent influence China’s economic growth?”, International
Journal of Manpower, Ahead-of-print.
Thunnissen, M., Boselie, P. and Fruytier, B. (2013), “Talent management and the relevance of context:
towards a pluralistic approach”, Human Resource Management Review, Vol. 23 No. 4,
pp. 326-336.
UNDP (2018), Human Development Indices and Indicators 2018: Statistical Update, UNDP,
New York.
Vaiman, V., Sparrow, P., Schuler, R. and Collings, D.G. (2019), Macro Talent Management in Emerging
and Emergent Markets: A Global Perspective, Routledge, New York.
Warr, P. (2007), Work, Happiness, and Unhappiness, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.
World Bank (2019), “New country classifications by income level: 2019-2020”, World Bank, available
at: https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-countryand-lending-groups.
Ybema, J.F., van Vuuren, T. and van Dam, K. (2020), “HR practices for enhancing sustainable
employability: implementation, use, and outcomes”, International Journal of Human Resource
Management, Vol. 31 No. 7, pp. 886-907.
Zhang, L. and Adom, P.K. (2018), “Energy efficiency in China: how persistent are the movements to/
from the frontier”, Energy Journal, Vol. 39 No. 6, pp. 147-169.

Appendix: Sampled countries by regions

Africa: Burkina Faso, Ghana, Algeria, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Botswana, Liberia, Cameroon, Mauritius, Madagascar,
Egypt, Namibia, Malawi, Kenya, South Africa, Mali, Lesotho, Mozambique, Morocco, Rwanda, Senegal,
Tanzania, Tunisia, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe
Asia: Nepal, Bangladesh, Armenia, Tajikistan, Bhutan, Azerbaijan, Yemen, Cambodia, China, India,
Georgia, Indonesia, Iran, Kyrgyzstan, Jordan, Lao PDR, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Lebanon, Pakistan, Malaysia,
the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Vietnam , Thailand and Turkey
LAC: Bolivia, Brazil, El Salvador, Colombia, Honduras, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, the Dominica Republic,
Ecuador, Guatemala, Jamaica, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela
Europe: Moldova, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovin, Bulgaria, Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Russian,
Serbia and Ukraine

Corresponding author
Alex Anlesinya can be contacted at: alexanlesinya@gmail.com

For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

Macro talent
management,
work and
wellbeing

