Authors: Simpson, S. N. Y & Damoah, O.B.O.
University of Ghana Business School, Legon, Accra, Ghana
E-mails: snysamuel@ug.edu.gh & o.o.damoah@uwic.ac.uk respectively

Title: An Evaluation of Financial Health of Non-Life
Insurance Companies from Developing Countries:
The Case of Ghana
Abstract
The paper seeks to shed light on the contention regarding ascertaining the financial soundness
of non-life insurance companies using a developing country as the context. It examines the
current evaluation tools being used by the Ghanaian regulatory and supervisory body (the
National Insurance Commission, NIC) on non-life insurance companies in Ghana and
compares it with the CARAMELS model including other rival theories in determining the
financial health of insurance companies.
The motivation of the study is that the unique format of insurance companies’ financials does
not lend itself to traditional financial accounting analysis. Besides, assessing financial
soundness in the insurance industry is a complex task since the overall financial position of an
insurance company depends on many factors, some of which are difficult to quantify. Though,
recommendations as well as conclusions from past studies concerning the financial health on
non-life insurance companies are mixed, but results from the study suggest that, the framework
being used currently by NIC to assess the financial health of non-life insurance companies in
Ghana is not comprehensive enough to give early warnings to the industry’s stakeholders and
that the CARAMELS model as proposed by other authors fits the Ghanaian context and helps
to bring to the fore, the generally accepted insurance core principles in the financial behaviour
of non-life insurance companies in Ghana.
Key Words: financial health, non-life insurance and risks

1

Introduction

1
Electronic
Electroniccopy
copyavailable
availableat:
at:https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Insurance is an important and growing part of the financial sector in almost all
developed and some developing economies. The insurance industry primarily provides
indemnification of risks faced by both individuals and companies, strengthens the
linkages with other sectors of the economy in promoting growth and stability, and
creating a sizeable impact on the national income of a country.
To achieve the above, it is essential to have a resilient and a well-regulated insurance
industry that provides adequate incentives for efficiency and fairness as well as
safeguards the interests of the policyholders. Moreover, it is imperative that the
insurance supervisory systems and practices are continually upgraded to cope with
developments as well as understand and address financial and systemic stability
concerns arising from the insurance sector as they emerge. For these reasons the
National Insurance Commission (NIC), a regulatory and supervisory body was
established by the Ghanaian government in 1989.
As an insurance supervisor, NIC’s main aim is to build and maintain public confidence
in the insurance industry by working to ensure that policyholders are fairly treated in
accordance with the terms and conditions of an insurance contract as well as guarantee
that insurance companies operating in the Ghanaian market are financially solvent and
capable of delivering on their promises to policyholders.
To reach the above goals, the NIC embarks on a number of supervisory processes
ranging from quantitative to qualitative assessments of the insurance companies (e.g.
financial analysis, market analysis report and so on, NIC Supervision Dept., 2007).
Every time an insurance company is declared insolvent, thousands of policyholders
suddenly find themselves with some very serious problems. That is why it is so
important to periodically evaluate and monitor the financial condition of insurance
companies by regulators, investors, and insurer management.
Often, the evaluation of insurance companies is mostly based on annual reports
submitted by insurers and if findings from the financial statements evaluation lead to
any doubt about the solidity of that company, then the supervisory body can decide to
request for more information or to visit the company for a more thorough examination
(on-site inspection).
An on-site inspection can give a better idea of the solidity of a company than a sole
analysis of the financial statements (Angerer, 1993). On-site inspections enable the NIC
to make sure that the documents submitted reflect the actual situation, and to obtain
additional prospective information about the business practices.
In this paper, we examine the evaluation framework1 being used by the Ghanaian
regulatory and supervisory body (NIC) and compare it with the CARAMELS and other
evaluation frameworks in determining the financial health of non-life insurance
companies in Ghana.

1

This study focuses on the financial evaluation aspect.

2
Electronic
Electroniccopy
copyavailable
availableat:
at:https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

This will in no doubt contribute to current literature and enhance the discussion on the
evaluation (supervisory) processes of insurance companies to ensure the existence of a
sound insurance market, a necessity for any successful economy.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: the next section discusses the
conceptual issues on the evaluation processes; section three (3) the data collection and
analysis; and finally, section four (4) the findings and recommendations.
2
Conceptual Background
Generally, insurance is considered a system under which the insurer (insurance
company), for a consideration (premium) usually agreed upon in advance, promises to
reimburse the insured (client) or to render services to the insured (client) in the event
that certain accidental occurrences result in losses during a given period (Columbia
Encyclopaedia, 2004,). It provides indemnification against loss or liability from specified
events and circumstances that may occur or be discovered during a specified period.
The nature of insurance activity, i.e. covering risks for the economy, financial and
corporate undertakings and households - has both differences and similarities when
compared to the other financial sectors. Insurance, unlike most financial products, is
characterized by the reversal of the production cycle insofar as premiums are collected
when the contract is entered into and claims and costs arise only if a specified event
occurs. Insurers intermediate risks directly. They manage these risks through
diversification and the law of large numbers enhanced by a range of other techniques.
These and other activities of insurers, i.e. Rate Making, Underwriting, Production, Claim
Settlement, Reinsurance, and Investments, aided by intermediaries (brokers and agents)
make the evaluation of an insurance company complex (Rejda, 1992).
For the above reason, the evaluation of insurers generally involves only statistical
information or a mixture of quantitative and qualitative information (e.g. Swiss Re,
Sigma No.4/2003 Das, et al 2003, Chen and Wong, 2004).
In developed countries, insurance company ratings agencies evaluate the financial
soundness and creditworthiness of insurers using a variety of both quantitative and
qualitative information, with different degree of emphasis.
2.1
The Evaluation of insurers by Rating Agencies
Insurance company ratings (evaluation) are vital to many insurance industry
constituencies because it provides guidance to many of the different constituencies
including regulators, agents and brokers, investors, insurance consumers, and the
insurer being rated.
Generally, insurers receive two principal types of ratings: financial strength ratings
(FSRs) and Debt ratings. The FSRs measures an insurer’s ability to meet its ongoing
policyholder obligations punctually, whilst a debt rating assesses the creditworthiness of
an insurer with respect to a specific debt issue (Swiss Re, Sigma No.4/2003)2.
2

This study focuses on the financial strength rating (evaluation).

3
Electronic
Electroniccopy
copyavailable
availableat:
at:https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Of the estimated 140 rating firms in the world, the basic methodology for the FSRs is
the use of the both quantitative and qualitative information. However, the
methodologies accepted globally is that of only five (5) rating agencies due to the fact
that they have widespread credibility and employ more than 100 analysts: A.M Best,
Fitch (formerly Duff & Phelps), Standard & Poors (S&P), Moody's investment services
3
and Weiss Ratings Inc .
Over nearly a century of experience, each firm has a well-defined methodology for
rating life and non-life insurers. They take qualitative and quantitative information into
account, use proprietary and public information, employ a capital adequacy model,
assign ratings through a committee process and make comparisons among peer groups
of insurers.
Moreover, the areas considered vary, i.e. leverage, management stability, recent
performance and financial situation. External factors such as competition, diversification
and market presence are also considered.
The S&P methodology4
S&P looks at about seven broad areas when evaluating an insurer: Business review (i.e.
industry risk and business position); Management and corporate strategy; Operating
performance; Investment; Capital adequacy; Liquidity; and Financial flexibility.
a)

Business review involves an examination of the industry risk and business
position. Whilst industry risk refers to the environment in which an insurer
operates, the business position relates to an insurer’s revenue-generating capacity
and competitive strengths. It examines competitive strengths and weaknesses,
legal and functional structures, business mix and diversification, life and non-life,
segmentation, premium growth rates, total market share of the company, and the
quality and spread of distribution channels

b)

Management and corporate strategy is considered critical by S&P despite the fact
that it is one of the most subjective areas. They include financial strategy and risk
management, strategic positioning of the insurer, and operational control and
skills. It is concerned with how effectively an insurer sets and meets goals.

c)

Operating performance relates to how well an insurer translates its fundamental
advantages into sustainable profit margins. This is examined in two main areas i.e.
analysis of underwriting performance and overall performance including
investment, other income and expenses

d)

Investment analysis done by S&P is to determine how the investment strategy fits
with the company's liability profile and the input of investment return on total
company earnings. This analysis provides an insight into how successful an
insurer is at generating investment returns and how sustainable these returns are.

3Sources: www.info.insure.com, Swiss Re, Sigma No.4/2003, www.thebenefitnetwork.com/insurerratings)
4
www.standardandpoors.com, Swiss Re, Sigma No.4/2003

4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

e)

f)

g)

Capital adequacy (capitalization) analysis is categorized into two broad areas: the
level of capital needed to support the insurance business at a given rating level;
and the structure and quality of capital.
Indeed the analysis is performed on a risk-based capital model which analyses
these features and develops a capital adequacy ratio.
Liquidity analysis concentrates on three core areas: underwriting cash flows; total
operating cash flows; and investment portfolio liquidity. For non-life insurers, S&P
considers: underwriting cash flows relative to cash outflows (paid losses, paid loss
expenses, and underwriting expenses); cash flows from investments; the level of
cash and short-term investments; liquidity needs under potential catastrophe
scenarios; and out-side sources of liquidity such as bank lines of credit and
established commercial paper programs.
Financial flexibility reflects a comparison between potential needs and available
sources of liquidity. The analysis in this area is largely qualitative but S&P consider
the potential need for liquidity or additional capital in the future, assessing
whether future funding needs can be met or otherwise.
5

A. M Best Methodology
This methodology is very similar between life and non-life business. The evaluations
are based on a comprehensive qualitative and quantitative analysis of a company’s
balance sheet strength, operating performance, and business profile.
a) Balance sheet strength is the most important area to evaluate in determining a
company’s ability to meet its current and ongoing obligations this includes
examination of capitalization, leverage (underwriting, financial and asset), and
liquidity.
For the capitalization, A.M Best uses the Best’s Capital Adequacy Ratio (BCAR)
which compares a company’s available capital to the net required capital needed
to support the financial risks to which it is exposed.
A.M Best derives the underwriting leverage from four sources: current premiums
written, annuity deposits, reinsurance, and loss or policy reserves, and the
financial leverage through debt or debt-like instruments (including financial
reinsurance) can strain cash flow and, like underwriting leverage, can create
financial instability. Besides, the asset leverage reflects the exposure of surplus to
investment, interest rate, and credit risk. The tests applied are different for life and
non-life insurers but they aim to give an insight into the strength of the balance
sheet and the risks inherent in the company's capital position. Besides, the
analysis includes consideration of the reinsurance arrangements including the
extent to which risk is transferred, the security of the reinsurance and the state of
the reinsurance market in general.
Finally, liquidity of the insurer is assessed by reviewing the impact of asset and
liability cash flows on both normal and stressed scenarios. For life insurers, this

5

www.ambest.com/ratings/guide, Swiss Re, Sigma No.4/2003

5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

b)

c)

analysis is more detailed than for non-life insurers due to the policyholder options
sometimes included in life insurance policies.
Operating performance focuses on the stability and sustainability of earnings
relative to the liabilities a firm retains. Indeed, this methodology reviews the last
five years of financial performance to assess profitability. Essentially, the analysis
is done by looking at key areas like underwriting, investments, capital gains/losses
and total operating earnings (before and after tax).
A.M Best Key Profitability tests for Non-life companies are: Loss Ratio; Expense
Ratio; Combined Ratio after Policyholder Dividends; Operating Ratio; Pretax
Return on Revenue; Yield on Invested Assets; Change in Policyholders’ Surplus;
6
and Return on Policyholders’ Surplus .
Market (Business) Profile is considered the most important by A M Best for
insurers writing long-term business. It reflects the riskiness of a company’s mix of
business, its competitive market position, and the depth and experience of its
management. These factors drive current and future operating performance and
can therefore affect long-term financial strength and the ability to meet
policyholder obligations. The key issues are revenue composition (including
revenue from premiums and investment income), management experience and
objectives, competitive position, spread of risk, and event risk.

Moody's Methodology7
Moody’s insurance financial strength ratings are opinions about the ability of insurers to
punctually pay senior policyholder claims and obligations and the assessments are
forward-looking and done on an ongoing basis. This approach emphasizes qualitative
analysis since current financial performance is not always an accurate indicator of future
performance and strength. The qualitative factors Moody’s considers relate to the
industry as a whole and to the individual firm in question.
See below table showing Moody’s “Top Ten Ratios” for non-life insurance companies
that is often used in the quantitative analysis8.
Table 1. Moody’s “Top Ten Ratios” for non-life insurers
Area of analysis
Capital adequacy

Non-life insurers
Gross underwriting leverage

Financial and operational leverage

Profitability

Financial leverage
Pretax interest coverage, Double
leverage
Core insurance return on earned
premium
Net income return on policyholder’s
surplus

6

Sources: A.M. Best, “Explanation of Best’s rating system and procedures”, for property and casualty companies
www.moodys.com, Swiss Re, Sigma No.4/2003
8
Sources: Moody’s. Property and Casualty insurance top ten ratios 2004 update, December 2005
7

6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Asset-liability management
and liquidity
Business fundamentals
Reserve adequacy

Operating cash flow as % of NPW
Diversification score, Market presence
score
Loss reserve development

In summary the Moody approach can be categorized into issues of Company franchise
which looks at the firm’s franchise value (i.e. competitive position, including its market
presence, brand identity and various aspects of its operations), the strategic focus and
risk appetite (i.e. review of management's attitude towards future strategies and the
expectations for growth and profitability), management and corporate governance,
Institutional support/ownership and organizational structure, and distribution and
brand.
The final categorization is financial analysis which includes the analysis of Profitability,
Investment risk and asset quality (i.e. by considering credit risk, interest rate risk and
foreign exchange risk relative to the insurer's liabilities, including the concentration of
risk and the marketability of assets), solvency and capitalization9, financial leverage, and
reinsurance and liabilities, underwriting and reserves.
For life insurers, Moody's scrutinize the strength of the actuarial assumptions and the
liability structure of the insurer including any options and the degree to which they are
consumer confidence or interest-rate sensitive. This evaluates the premium rate
monitoring and underwriting process.
Fitch (formerly Duff & Phelps) Methodology10
A Fitch Ratings Insurer Financial Strength Rating (IFS Rating) provides an opinion as to
the financial strength of an insurance organization, and its financial capacity to meet
obligations to policyholders and contract holders on a timely basis. IFS ratings are used
primarily by individuals and companies that purchase insurance, as well as their agents
or brokers, to help judge if the insurance carrier is financially sound. The IFS rating is
an international-scale rating, and incorporates relevant economic and political risks that
could impair an insurance organization's capacity to meet its obligations.
The IFS Rating is based on a comprehensive analysis of relevant factors that in large
part determine an insurance organization's financial strength, including its regulatory
solvency characteristics, liquidity, operating performance, financial flexibility, balance
sheet strength, management quality, competitive positioning and long-term business
viability.
Weiss Ratings Inc Methodology11
9

This is one of the critical parts of the analysis and focuses on the free capital that is available to cover
the obligations.
10
www.fitchrating.com (May 2007)
11
www.weissrationg.com (May, 2007),The Weiss Approach to Insurance Company Safety Ratings (2003)

7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Weiss Ratings are based on their analysts' review of publicly available information
collected by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), and
supplemented by data collected directly from the companies themselves. Unlike the
other major rating agencies, Weiss does not accept compensation from the companies it
rates, and thus does not allow companies to influence the ratings they receive or to
suppress the release of their ratings.
The main components of the rating system are summarized in the following indexes:
a) Capitalization Index: This index answers the basic questions: What risks are the
company taking and how much of its own capital resources does it have to
cover any losses?
b) Reserve Adequacy Index (P&C only): This index determines the adequacy of a
company’s reserves and how accurately it anticipates the level of claims it will
receive each year.
c)
Profitability Index includes the gain or loss on operations by line of business;
consistency of operating results; impact of operating results on surplus;
adequacy of investment income as compared to the needs of policy reserves;
and industry average expenses, based on number and type of policies written
and renewed, to actual company expenses.
d)
Liquidity Index evaluates a company’s ability to raise the necessary cash to
settle claims and honor cash withdrawal obligations. Various cash flow
scenarios are modeled to determine how the company might fare in the event
of a spike in claims or a run on policy surrenders.
e)
Investment Safety Index (L&H and Health only) gauges each company’s
exposure to: bond and mortgage defaults; market value declines; and changes
in interest rates.
f)
Stability Index includes factors such as:
I.
risk diversification in terms of company size, number of policies in
force, and other items related to spread of risk,
II. deterioration of operations as reported in critical asset, liability,
income or expense items such as surrender rates, premium volume,
etc.,
III. former problem areas where there may have been recent
improvement but where the company is yet to establish a record of
stable performance in those areas over a suitable period of time,
generally three to five years,
IV. factors which identify a substantial shift in the company’s operations,
V. factors which identify potential instabilities not included in other
indexes, such as reinsurance quality, asset/liability matching and
sources of capital,
VI. relationships to holding companies and affiliates,
VII. plus other technical factors related to stability and change.
2.2

Other Evaluation Methodologies and the CARAMEL Framework
Evaluation of insurers (e.g. the financial condition) is a primary goal of
regulators, investors, and insurer management. Each group is interested in a
different aspect: Regulators must ascertain a company’s ability to operate and
meet its obligations while investors and insurer management are interested in a
company’s long term growth and profit potential (Grace and Barth, 1993).
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

To date, evaluating insurers has been one of the critical activities of regulators
globally, so, they have developed and adopted several tools and methods for the
evaluation. The methods range from quantitative and qualitative tools and
sometimes depend on rating agencies (, Swiss Re, Sigma No.4/2003).
To maintain efficient, fair, safe and stable insurance markets for the benefit and
protection of policyholders, the evaluation methods of regulators has
emphasized on the financial condition of insurers. According to Grace and Barth
(1993), the most systematic methods used has been to categorize insurers into
two groups: (1) those now insolvent or potentially insolvent within a short
period of time and (2) all others. They are interested in how much capital
insurers have to buttress the risk inherent in their investments and operations.
Monitoring the solvency of insurers is one of the prime concerns of insurance
supervisors. For instance, European regulators initially created solvency
requirements as quick and easy measures to identify undercapitalized companies
before they got into trouble. However, these standards were necessarily based
on industry averages, and some companies ran the risk of wrongly appearing to
hold inadequate capital because the particular risk characteristics of their
business meant that the standard factors were inappropriate. In addition, the
required capital indicated by the calculations was unlikely to be appropriate for
the risks borne by individual insurance companies, since it was based on
premium written or claims incurred, not on claim reserves. Currently, regulators
envisage Solvency II measures which are much more sophisticated, dealing with
capital requirements for each of the solvency risk sources (see e.g. Collins, et
al.2007 Grace and Barth, 1993).
Sterling (2000) in his update of Insurance Regulation and Supervision in OECD
countries, Asian Economies, Latin-American Countries and CEEC and NIS
Countries, recommended that supervisors must have a close eye on the capital
resources (solvency), the formation of technical provisions, and the existence of
assets (investments) necessary to meet the insured liabilities when evaluating
insurers.
In the US, National Association of Insurance Commissioners run the Insurance
Regulatory Information System (IRIS), a database designed to provide
information about insurers' financial solvency. IRIS uses the financial statements
of the insurer to calculate a series of financial ratios, which are then taken as a
measure of the insurer's overall financial condition. The system acts as an earlywarning protection, which aids state insurance departments to pick out those
companies that show financial problems.
It is clear from the above discussions that in many jurisdictions, the regulators
evaluate the insurers from the financial report usually the annual accounts
(balance sheet, profit and loss accounts, and additional notes), an annual
statement of the solvency margin, and statements concerning premium income
due, losses, reserves, assets etc. submitted periodically.

9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Generally, the evaluation methods include Ratio Analysis, Historical Trend
Analysis, and Linear Regression Analysis using software tools, Judgmental
Forecasting and Cause and Effect Analysis . The most commonly used tool is the
ratio analysis. It informs the overall assessment of the insurer by the supervisor.
Essentially, ratios of this type may serve four particular purposes for the
insurance supervisor (Thorburn, 2004):
• as part of the analysis of financial returns within the supervisory process
• as an ‘early warning system’ (i.e. the trends and levels of ratios)
• as part of “Risk Based Supervision”:
• to enable the compliance with requirements of the laws and
regulations to be assessed.
12

Figure 1: A diagrammatic representation of the role of Ratio analysis in
Evaluating Insurers

Financial Returns from
insurers (ICP 12)

Reports on market
analysis (ICP 11)

Ratio Analysis
(ICP 12)
Supervisory
conclusions (ICP 4)

Source: Thorburn (2004)

Other
Qualitative
Aanalysis (ICP
)

Indeed, all evaluating frameworks use ratios in assessing the financial soundness
of insurers. The CARAMEL framework proposed by Das et al. (2003) is not an
exception. They argue the selected indicators within the CARAMELS framework,
adds the Actuarial and Reinsurance issues to the CAMELS (Capital adequacy,
Asset quality, Management soundness, Earnings and profitability, Liquidity, and
Sensitivity to market risk) used by the banks to capture some aspects of the
systems important for financial stability.
This framework was developed taking into account the Insurance Core Principles
(see IAIS, 2000) and: The analytical significance; Achieving substantial
information content with a limited number of indicators; Availability of data; and
12

In Ghana the analysis methods are Trend analysis, Ratio analysis and Analytical review (Source: NIC
Supervision Dept. June 2007)

10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

The relevance in most circumstances (i.e., not specific for a given country or line
of business).
Thorburn (2004) observed from the world bank perspective that, the main areas
of evaluating insurers are: Business Volumes and Trends; Reinsurance;
Profitability – Level, Quality And Source; Technical Provisions; Assets; Solvency
And Capital; The View Of Other stakeholder (i.e. investors).

2.3

What’s more, Chen and Wong (2004) argue the issues to be considered may be
grouped into firm specific and market/economic factors. They added the firm
specific factors which is associated with general (non-life) insurers cover mainly:
firm size; age of the company; premium growth; investment performance;
underwriting results (operating margin); expense; loss reserves; realized and
unrealized capital gains; growth rate of surplus; liquidity, and reinsurance
recoveries. However, they concluded that the main areas of concern are
liquidity, profitability and capacity.
Comparison of the Evaluating Methodologies: Common Practices and
Differences
On the rating firms, each firm has a well-defined methodology for rating life and
non-life insurers. These approaches share much in common. This is due in part
to competitive dynamics, whereby firms can imitate the useful innovations of
their competitors. It also reflects the cross-fertilization that occurs as people
move from firm to firm. The way insurers are rated follows a long-standing
approach that, though still evolving, it is rooted in decades of institutional
experience. One common feature among the rating firms is that they consider a
combination of quantitative and qualitative factors. Here are some of other
common practices:
Each of the firms uses an elaborate model to assess the capital adequacy of
insurers. This capital adequacy model is one of several measures that rating firms
consult when judging capital adequacy. Together with the regulator’s capital
adequacy model and other financial ratios, it helps flag potential problems
Furthermore, when possible, the rating firms collect supplementary information
from management to use in conjunction with publicly available regulatory and
accounting data. Although it is possible to create a rating based just on public
information, this supplementary information increases the precision and
confidence behind a rating.
Besides, each of the firms assigns a lead analyst responsibility for recommending
a particular rating. These ratings are reviewed by a committee of seasoned
colleagues who debate the pros and cons of the viewpoint propounded and
then vote on a rating.
On the other frameworks, an examination of the popular areas and ratios of
concern in the evaluation of insurers discussed above show that, the frameworks
have common issues although some variables in the indicators are different (e.g.

11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

using claims incurred or net claims and so on). Some of the areas of similarity
are profitability, asset quality and capital.
However, one area significantly missing in the other frameworks apart from
CARAMEL is the issue of management soundness. Das et al., (2003) argue sound
management is vital in the assessment of the financial strength of an entity, it is crucial
for financial stability of insurers, though it is very difficult, to find any direct
quantitative measure of management soundness. They added, unsound efficiency
indicators could flag potential problems in key areas, including the management
of technical and investment risks.
Actuarial issues is another area missing. The core set suggests the use of the ratio called
survival ratio (net technical reserves to net claims paid in the last three years) for nonlife insurance. This indicator may be viewed as showing the quality of the company’s
estimate of the value of the reported and outstanding claim.
See on the table A in the appendix showing a comparison of ratios from some
of popular frameworks discussed above.

3

Data Collection
To appreciate the research issues raised in the study and to place the relevant
literature in context as well as generalize the study to some extent, a thorough
review of secondary data was made. Besides, resource persons from the National
Insurance Commission (NIC) were interviewed to expatiate on the activities and
the evaluation processes of the non-life insurers in Ghana.
Out of the eighteen (18) non-life insurers and two (2) reinsurers in Ghana, as at
31st December, 2006, the annual reports of eight (8) of the insurers and one (1)
reinsurer were purposively selected for the study (i.e. examine the adequacy of
information supplied by the reports for purposes of evaluating insurers) and
interviewed. In addition, the annual reports of the the National Insurance
Commission (NIC), the supervisory body were examined over a five (5) year (i.e.
2001 to 2005) period.
On the evaluation of the insurers, the researchers obtained the secondary data
on the financial analysis of the NIC, including the supervisory process with
emphasis on the quantitative analysis.

4

Discussion of Findings
In Ghana, apart from the internal evaluation by insurers themselves, the
regulatory and supervisory body known as the National Insurance Commission
(NIC) has the sole responsibility of evaluating insurers. Established as an
autonomous body by the Insurance Law, 1989(PNDCL.227), the objective of the
Commission is to ensure effective administration, supervision, regulation and
control of the business of insurance in Ghana.

12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

The NIC seeks to achieve the above objective by embarking on the following:
• Ensuring strict compliance with the provisions of the Insurance Law and
Regulations
and any other enactment relating to insurance.
• Registering insurers and insurance intermediaries who transact insurance
business in Ghana.
• Establishing standards for the conduct of insurance business for compliance
by insurers and insurance intermediaries.
• Approving rates of insurance premiums and commissions in respect of all
classes of insurance.
• Protecting insurance policyholders, insurance beneficiaries and third parties
to any insurance contract.
• Approving standards, conditions and warranties to be applicable to
insurance.
• Providing a bureau to which complaints may be submitted by members of
the public.
• Settling such insurance claims as may be referred to it by parties to any
insurance contract.
• Ensuring adequate insurance protection and security for national strategic
assets and properties.
• Formulating proposals for the promotion of sound and efficient insurance
market in the country.
• Supervising and controlling transactions between local insurers and their
reinsurers abroad.
• Undertaking sustained and methodical public education on the insurance
business in general.
• Generally discharging such other functions as are necessary or incidental to
the above functions.
To enable NIC carry out the above functions and realize its aims and objectives,
it collaborates with international organizations such as the International
Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), the African Insurance Organization
(AIO), the West African Insurance Companies Association (WAICA), and the
West African Insurance Institute (WAII).
As insurance supervisors, NIC’s main aim is to build and maintain public
confidence in the insurance industry by working to ensure that policyholders are
fairly treated in accordance with the terms and conditions of insurance contracts
and that insurers operating in the Ghanaian market are financially solvent and
capable of delivering on their promises to policyholders.
The resource person interviewed at NIC observed that it is the responsibility of
the supervision department of the NIC to evaluate insurers to ensure that they
are all financially solvent.
He explained that, the supervisory processes include five (5) main steps;
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Financial Returns from the insurers,
Market Analysis Report,
Ratio Analysis and Assessment,
Other Qualitative Analysis and Assessment, and
Supervisory Conclusions and others steps where necessary.

He intimated that the main tools used by the department in evaluating insurer in
Ghana are trend analysis, ratio analysis and analytical reviews. Asked of other
tools like Linear Regression Analysis using software tools, Judgmental
Forecasting and Cause and Effect Analysis, he claimed the NIC is aware but think
what they are currently using is simple and understandable.
On the evaluation of insurers, he observed that, the critical areas of evaluating
the insurers are: Operational efficiency; Profitability; Solvency; Capital adequacy;
Liquidity; Quality of assets; and Quality and adequacy of investment. Moreover,
an examination of NIC’s annual report showed that reinsurance (retention) is
considered critical though not cited.
Supporting the above, the researchers were provided with the following list of
ratios used in evaluating insurers (see table 2):

Table 2. List of insurer evaluating ratios used by NIC
Claims ratio
Claims Incurred/ Gross Premiums
Expense ratio
Management Expenses/ Gross Premiums
Combined ratio
Claims Ratio + Expense Ratio
Operating ratio
Claims ratio + Expense ratio – Investment
ratio
Outstanding premiums Ratio
Outstanding P/Gross Premiums
Return on equity
Net Profit after tax/Shareholders Funds
Return on assets
Net Profit before interest & tax /Total
Assets
Retention Ratios
Net premiums /Gross Premiums
Return on investments
Investment income/ total investments
Investments income to
Investments income /Gross premiums
premiums ratio
Investments to total assets ratio
Investments / total assets ratio
Gross premium to equity ratio
Gross premium / Shareholders’ Funds
Net premium to equity ratio13
Net premium / Shareholders’ Funds
Capital to liabilities ratio
Shareholders’ Funds/Total Liabilities
Source: NIC Supervision Dept. (May, 2007)
13

This ratio was not among the list of ratios provided but was identified in the NIC annual report.

14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Based on the ratios provided, we inquired if the Commission has heard of the
CARAMEL framework, the resource person answered in the affirmative.
However, an examination of the annual reports of the National Insurance
Commission (NIC) showed that, the management soundness component of
CARAMEL was absent. Furthermore, nothing was on measuring the actuarial issues,
and liquidity. For the earning and profitability indicators, the NIC uses gross premiums
as denominator in computing the loss and expense ratios instead of net premiums
earned and net premiums income respectively. A follow up interview revealed that
insurers’ liquidity positions are determined for internal use by the NIC only.
From the perspective of insurers on the extent to which the CARAMEL is used
internally by insurers revealed that 37.5% of the respondents rated Capital
adequacy first the rest except (one no response) rated it 5th and 6th respectively.
25% rated Asset quality first, 12.5% for Reinsurance and Actuarial issues, Liquidity
and Earning and profitability. However, none rated Management soundness first.
The closet is 3rd by 25% of the respondents.
Considering all the mean scores of responses, Liquidity has the lowest score (i.e.
ranked favorably) meaning it is the most widely used. Management soundness is
however the less used in the Ghanaian insurance market. This is shown in table
3 below
Table 3. Mean Scores of the Use of CARAMEL by insurers internally

Capital adequacy
Asset quality
Re - insurance and
Actuarial issues
Management soundness
Earning and profitability
Liquidity

Minimum
1.00
1.00

Maximum
6.00
6.00

Mean
3.5714
3.2857

Std. Deviation
2.4398
2.1381

1.00

6.00

3.5714

1.7182

3.00

5.00

3.8333

.7528

1.00

6.00

3.1250

1.7269

1.00

5.00

2.5714

1.2724

Source: Research Data
5

Conclusions and Recommendations
The evaluation tool in use by NIC in the assessment of insurers in Ghana
excludes management soundness and actuarial issues proposed under the
CARAMEL. The closest to management soundness is the ratio of investment
income to investment which according to (IAIS) is useful for life business
insurance due to its long-term orientation.

15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Actuarial issues is another area missing. The core set suggests the use of the ratio
called survival ratio (net technical reserves to net claims paid in the last three
years) for non-life insurance. This indicator may be viewed as showing the
quality of the company’s estimate of the value of the reported and outstanding
claim.
Furthermore, the use of gross premiums as denominator for loss and expense
ratios does not show the true condition since net premium is the amount
available for use by the insurers. Moreover, it appears insurers in Ghana depend
too much on reinsurance. The consequences may be ruinous when for instance
the reinsurer fails. Moreover, they are exposed to underwriting, investment and
liquidity risks. This is evidenced first by the non- commensurate increase in
capital and net premium income. Secondly, the low returns on investments
suggest investment risks. Additionally, the insurers mostly show favorable net
commission balance indicating that they pay less to their agents and brokers.
This has a high likelihood of influencing especially brokers to keep premiums
collected for investments before it is paid to the insurers. This consequently
affects the liquidity position of the insurers.
In light of the above, NIC needs to be alert to relevant developments within
other global fora, particularly risk-based, supervisory developments in other
financial sectors such as the banks. It must exploit its monitoring, supervisory and
regulatory potentials to the fullest However, there is a strong need to reflect the
particular nature of insurance, and the specific risks associated with it.
It must consider issues developed by IAIS in addressing aspects of insurer
solvency, based on the Insurance core principles and methodology (October
2003) and the Principles on capital adequacy and solvency (January 2002).
Furthermore, it must pay attention to the three groups of supervision issues:
financial issues (solvency and capital adequacy, valuation and adequacy of
technical provisions, forms of capital, investments, and financial reporting and
disclosure), governance issues (the Board, directors, senior management and
other organisational aspects; fit and proper testing of directors and management;
administrative, organisational and internal controls, including risk management;
compliance with legislative requirements; shareholder relationships; and the
governance risks posed by group structures), and market conduct issues.

16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Reference:
Angerer, A. (1993), 'Insurance Supervision in OECD Member Countries,' Policy
Issues in Insurance , Paris, France, OECD, pp. 13-72.
A.M. Best, “Explanation of Best’s rating system and procedures”, for property and
casualty companies, www.ambest.com/ratings/guide
Chen R. and Wong, K.A., (2004), ‘The Determinants of Financial Health of Asian
Insurance Companies’, The Journal of Risk And Insurance, Vol. 71
Collins D. J., Reid J. and Roest M., (2007)’Property/Casualty Insurance; A Better Tool For
Evaluating Uncertainty’, Emphasis Vol1
Columbia Encyclopaedia, (2004), Online
Das, Udaibir S., Davies N., and Podpiera R., (2003), “Insurance and Issues Financial
Soundness”, Washington: IMF Working Paper,
Grace Martin F, and Barth Michael M.(1993), ‘The Regulation And Structure Of Nonlife
Insurance In The United States’ working papers (WPS 1155) Financial Sector
Development Department, The World Bank
International Association of Insurance Supervisors (2000) and (2004), Newsletter
Insurance Company Ratings, Swiss Re, Sigma No.4/2003
Moodys Investors Services (2005), “Property and Casualty Insurance Top Ten Ratios
Year-End 2004”, www.moodys.com
Rejda G.E (1992), Principles of Risk Management and Insurance, 4th Ed., HarperCollins
publishers Inc., New York
Sterling Robert (2000), ‘Insurance Regulation And Supervision In OECD Countries, Asian
Economies, Latin-American Countries And Ceec And Nis Countries’, Organisation

17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

for Economic Co-operation and Development, www.oecd.org/daf/insurancepensions/
The
Weiss
Approach
to
Insurance
Company
Safety
Ratings
(2003),
www.weissrationg.com.
Thorburn Craig (2004), ‘A Primer on Non-life Insurance Ratios for Insurance
Supervisors’, World Bank
www.fitchrating.com
www.info.insure.com,
www.thebenefitnetwork.com/insurerratings
www.standardandpoors.com

18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

1.Net Premium / Capital
2.Capital / Total Assets
3.Capital / Technical
Reserves

1.(Real Estate +
Unquoted Equities +
Debtors) / Total Assets
2.Debtors / (Gross
Premium + Reinsurance
Recoveries)
3.Equities / Total Asset

Asset
Quality

Indicator

Capital
Adequacy

Area of
analysis
CARAMEL

Losses incurred_± Adj. Exp.
Premium earned
Acq. Exp_± Admn. Exp.
Premium written
Acq. Exp.± Admn. Exp.
Premium earned
Losses incurred + Adj. Exp.
Prem. Earned
Prem.Wrtn
Losses incurred_±Underw.
Exp.
Premium earned

Profitability
1.Loss ratio
2.Expense ratio
(trade basis)
3.Expense ratio
(financial)
4.Combined
ratio (trade
basis)
5.Combined
ratio (financial)

Premium due
Surplus

Stated liabilities
Liquid asset

2.Liability to
liquid asset ratio
3.Premium due
to surplus

Liquid asset at mkt. v
total reserves

Area of
analysis
Chen and
Wong (2004)
Liquidity
1.Liquidity ratio
Indicator

ASSETS
1.Asset Mix
2.Investment assets
and other assets
3.Inadmissible
Assets
4.Liquidity

4.Solvency coverage

2.Technical
Provisions and
Capital
3.Solvency Margin

Solvency And
Capital
1.Premiums and
Capital
(Gross OR Net)

Area of analysis
Thorburn (2004)

Inadmissible
Assets/Capital
Adjusted
Liabilities/Defined
Liquid Assets

Equities/
Investments
Total
Investments/Total
Assets

19

Available Solvency/
Required Solvency

Capital/ Techn.
Provisions

GPW/Capital OR
NPW/Capital

Indicator

Table A. Comparison of the areas of ratios analysis of the CARAMEL, and other frameworks

Appendix

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

1.Gross Premium /
Number of Employees

Mgt.
Sound-ness

2.Total Assets / Number
of Employees

1.Risk Retention Ratio
(Net Premium / Gross
Premium)
2.Net Technical
Reserves / Average of
Net Claims Paid in Last
Three Years
3.Net Technical
Reserves / Average of
Net Premium Received
in Last Three Years

Reins.
and
Actuarial
Issues
Starting admitted asset
Prem. earned
Prem. Written
Surplus
Change in prem. Written
Prem. (prior year)
C’ssions on Reinsurance
Surplus

2. Premium to
surplus ratio
3. Change in
writing ratio
4. Surplus aid to
surplus

Investment income
Prem. earned
Change in surplus
Starting surplus

Investment income
Ave. invested assets

Capacity
1. Assets to
premium ratio

8. Change in
surplus ratio

7. Investment
income ratio

6.Investment
yield ratio

3.Maximum event
retentions (MER)

2.Net retention rates

Reinsurance
1.Cession rates

R
GWP
NWP
GWP
MER
Capital

20

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

1.Loss Ratio
Net Claims / Net Prem.
2. Expense Ratio
(Expenses / Net Prem.)
3.Combined Ratio =
Loss Ratio + Exp. Ratio
3.Revisions to Technical
Reserves / Technical
Reserves
4.Investment Income /
Net Premium
5.Investment Income /
Investment Assets
6.Return on Equity
(ROE)

1.Liquid Assets /
Current Liabilities

Earnings
and ProfitAbility

Liquidity

2.Expense ratio

Technical
provisions
1.Unearned
premiums

7.Investment
Income Ratio

UPP
WP

RGL
Pr emium

U
NEP
6.(ii)Underwriting
Ratios
Quality of the
investment result

Pr ofit
OR
Pr emium

CR + ER − IR

EI
Pr emium

6.(i)Profit ratios OR

5.Operating ratio

4.Investment
income ratio

3.Combined ratio

E
WP
CR + ER

IC
EP

Profitability –
level, quality and
source
1.Claims ratio

21

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=1138338

Sensitivity
to Market
Risk

1.Net Open Foreign
Exchange Position /
Capital
2.Duration of Assets
and Liabilities

The View Of Other
Stakeholders
Return on Capital

4.Un-expired risk

3.IBNR to reported
provisions

2.Claims paid to
claims provisions

Profit/Capital

CP
C Pr ov
IBNR
C Pr OV

22

