September 2023

Vol. 12 No. 2

Postgraduate Medical Journal of Ghana

EXPLORING THE PSYCHOLOGICAL EXPERIENCES OF WOMEN WITH
INFERTILITY IN URBAN GHANA: A QUALITATIVE STUDY
Otchere LN1; Sefogah PE2; Yarney L1; Baku AA1; Adzei FA1
1

Department Public Administration and Health Services Management, University of Ghana Business
School, Legon, Accra. Ghana; 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Ghana Medical
School, College of Health Sciences, Korle Bu, Accra, Ghana

Abstract
Infertility was found to inﬂuence both psychological and
social well-being of affected women.
Conclusion: Infertility imposes significant impairment
on the emotional, psychological and social well-being of
women in Ghana. These include isolation, abuse, loss of
self-esteem, and marital instability. What is already
known? Infertility may impose psychological distress on
affected couples. What did study add? This study reveals
the extent to which infertility-related distress affects the
daily living experience of women in Ghana, including
physical abuse. How this study might affect research,
practice, or policy? The severity of the psychological
burden of infertility is worse on women and this could
be mitigated if the associated high costs of infertility
treatment are subsidized.

Objective: To explore experiences of women seeking
treatment in Ashanti region of Ghana regarding
infertility and its effect on daily living.
Methodology: A qualitative study utilizing content
analysis approach. Purposive sampling of 18 women
with infertility who sought infertility treatment as
referral cases in Kumasi, Ashanti Region were selected
for a semi-structured in-depth interview after giving
informed consent.
Results: Four main themes emerged as participants’
perception of infertility and its consequences on their
daily lives.
These include: “abuse”, “marital
instability”, “social isolation”, and “loss of self-esteem.”
The most predominant theme was “loss of self-esteem”.

Key words: infertility, Ghana, women, psychology, social suffering.
first seek traditional or spiritual treatment for infertility,
others would consider adoption, re-marriage, or even
divorce as solutions. Women with infertility tend to
worry and suffer loneliness because infertility and its
treatment affect their daily lives and livelihoods.9
Understanding infertility as a socially constructed
problem enables affected individuals to define their
inability to conceive as such, determine its nature and
subsequently formulate the needed course of action
towards a solution. Because infertility is primarily an
inability to achieve a desired social role and goal, it often
becomes associated with psychological distress. From
the early twentieth century, the concept of equal
reproductive roles of both men and women in achieving
pregnancy became known and indicates the importance
of normal reproductive function in both partners for
conception to occur.10 This knowledge has since
informed clinicians to approach infertility as a couple
issue and not only a woman’s issue.11
The health belief model (HBM)12 demonstrates how
individuals take steps to treat and prevent diseases. The
original HBM concept states that: “an individual’s
health behaviour is determined by personal beliefs and
perceptions about a disease and strategies available to
minimize their occurrence.” 12.13
The Ghanaian society is traditionally pronatalist with
the average woman desiring four children.14 Within the
Ashanti cultural context, which is typical of the
Ghanaian culture, childbearing is so highly desirable
that its absence with a ﬁrst wife may lead to the
husbands marrying a second wife. Further, childbearing

Introduction
Infertility is highly prevalent and constitutes a major
reproductive health problem in developing countries but
this has been significantly under-appreciated.1,2
Infertility rates are high on the African continent where
it has reportedly been associated with serious social
consequences. There is however, scanty research data on
the psychological issues relating to infertility.1 Infertility
affects 10% - 32% of couples in Africa.3 In the SubSaharan African Region, the prevalence of infertility is
higher (15% - 30%) than many other regions of the
world.4 Secondary infertility is predominant in Africa,
while most other regions have predominance of primary
infertility.5,6 The World Health Organization (WHO),
defines infertility as a failure to achieve a clinical
pregnancy after 12 months or more of regular
unprotected sexual intercourse.7 In the African sociocultural setting, infertility often becomes a tragedy for
the affected family. In African culture, womanhood has
been equated to motherhood, so that women are blamed
for a couples’ infertility.8 Many couples would usually
Corresponding Author: Dr. Promise E. Sefogah
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of Ghana Medical School,
College of Health Sciences, Korle Bu, Accra,
Ghana.
Tel: +233 (0) 206301297
Email Address: promees@hotmail.com
Conflict of Interest: None Declared
This is an Open Access Article under the CC BY License

69

doi: 10.60014/pmjg.v12i2.336

September 2023

Sefogah PE et al.

enhances family stability, promotes marital satisfaction
and gives families recognition in the Ghanaian society.15
In the Ashanti Region infertility remains a major social
and reproductive health problem for approximately a
quarter of couples.14
Although previous studies demonstrated the
relationship between physical and psychological
suffering and infertility, different aspects of infertility
remain unclear and require further research in our
setting.16 The limited qualitative data on this subject in
the Ghanaian context necessitated this study.

Psychological Experiences of Women with Infertility

Trustworthiness, certainty of the evidence collected
were ensured through member checking, done by asking
the respondents to verify the preliminary ﬁndings from
the earlier interviews. The researchers independently
analyzed the data by identifying and categorizing codes
for the participants’ responses to each question, and then
the two authors’ codes and their latest analysis
development as themes were compared.

Ethical Approval
Ethical approval was obtained from the College of
Humanities, University of Ghana (ECH-220/21-22).

Materials and Methods
Results

A qualitative design based on content analysis
approach was used to gain in-depth understanding and
describe the world of human experiences that
participants live through. Using a purposive sampling
method, women in Ghana seeking fertility treatment at
the gynaecology department of Trustcare Specialist and
Fertility Centre, Kumasi were approached, and study
protocol explained to them. Women 18years and above,
seeking fertility treatment who consented to participate
in the study were subsequently recruited consecutively.
These were patients for whom the cause of infertility had
been previously established as female factor. Women
whose partners had male factor infertility, and those for
whom the cause was not determined were excluded. The
interviews took place at the study site on alternate days
from November 2021 to January 2022.
Semi-structured in-depth interviews were conducted
individually in a private and confidential setting to
ensure participants were relaxed and felt at rest in
answering interview questions. Each interview session
lasted averagely one hour. At the point of saturation, a
total of eighteen women seeking treatment for female
factor infertility had been interviewed.
The interview questions focused on: (i) the women’s
infertility experiences; (ii) understanding of infertility,
and (iii) their perspective on infertility. Data on the
participants’ sociodemographic characteristics were
also obtained.
In addition to asking about the
educational background of participants, their husbands’
educational background was also determined. The
interviews were conducted by the first author in the Twi
local language which all the participants understood and
preferred, and then translated into English. Each
interview was recorded and transcribed verbatim and
then analyzed concurrently.17
Drawing on study by Graneheim & Landman (2004),
the following five steps were taken to analyze the
collected data with the help of trained research assistants
and a qualitative research analyst: transcribing the
interviews verbatim and reading through several times
to obtain a sense of the whole; dividing the text into
meaningful condensed units; abstracting the condensed
units and labelling with codes; sorting codes into subcategories and categories based on comparisons
regarding their similarities and differences; formulating
themes as the expression of the latent content of the text.
This is an Open Access Article under the CC BY License

The participants’ ages ranged from 25–45years
(mean: 34years; SD=5.90). The participants’ husbands’
ages ranged 28–55years (mean: 41years; SD=6.50).
Duration of infertility ranged between 3-18years (mean:
9years; SD=6.62). Three participants (17%) attained
tertiary education, four (22%) had secondary education,
and eleven (61%) had only basic education. The
educational statuses of the participants’ husbands were
similar to the participants.’ During data analysis, four
main themes emerged: “abuse”, “marital instability”,
“social isolation”, and “loss of self-esteem”. The
meaning of each theme is presented using participants’
direct quotations. Abuse: One of the extracted themes
from the data was abuse. It consisted of two sub-themes:
“psychological abuse” and “physical abuse”. Abuse
occurred with infertility and interrupted the mutual
understanding between couples in most cases.
Psychological violence was commonly reported among
infertile women, inflicted by their husbands and
husbands’ relatives. Three women (17%) experienced
physical violence from their husbands due to their
infertility.
Psychological abuse: One participant said, “My
husband sometimes humiliates me due to my infertility
and he insults me and my family.” Another participant:
“I am an educated woman and have a master’s degree in
Arts, but my husband always begins to cry and curse me
for my infertility. I feel that my personality is lost in
these situations.” One participant expressed, “My
husband always reminds me that if he had married
another woman, he would already have had a child.” The
interactions of infertile couples’ relatives were also
affected by the condition. When pregnancy was delayed,
the relatives began to blame the couples. The blame and
pressure of the relatives was actually considered one of
the signiﬁcant concerns in the infertile couples’ lives.
One participant disclosed, “My husband’s family,
particularly my mother-in-law and sister-in-law,
provoke my husband against me.” Another explained,
“My sister-in-law always tells my husband: ‘divorce
your wife and re-marry with another woman who can
bring you a child.’” In Ghana, some couples live in the
husband’s family house with members of the husband’s
family. This leads to interference of by husband’s family
70

doi: 10.60014/pmjg.v12i2.336

September 2023

Vol. 12 No. 2

in the private lives of couples in such situations. In cases
of infertility, the man’s family becomes more involved
in the couple’s lives, putting more pressure on the
women involved. (Dyer, 2007).
“I suffer the
humiliations and rebukes of my mother-in-law and I feel
helpless and cannot do anything.”

suffered from infertility, they have not invited me to
birthday celebrations of their children.”
Loss of self-esteem: one of the objectives of marriage is
to have a child in society. It is believed that having a
child maintains and preserves the generation. According
to Gerrits et al, when a woman understands she is
infertile, she loses her self-esteem and feels that she is
inadequate as a person. 25 Respondents said, “I would
never have married if I knew that I could not bear a
child. Now, I feel useless and think that my works are
futile.” “One of the characteristics of the female is to
bear, breastfeed and raise a child. If a woman fails to do
these, then she is not a proper woman.” Others
expressed, “I believe that a woman can reach her ﬁnal
evolution when she can bear a child.” Some participants
asserted that they did not deserve to become mothers and
thought that their infertility was a type of punishment
from God, “‘Mother’ is a sacred word and not everybody
deserves to be a mother. Perhaps I am one of them.”
“I sometimes feel that I am not a woman because I
cannot bear a child. I think that I have one thing less than
other women.”

Physical abuse: Besides psychological violence, three
women also talked about physical violence. One woman
said: “My husband sometimes beats me. I stay silent
because I do not want anybody to be aware of my
problems.” Another participant, “My husband is very
bad tempered; he tells me that ‘you were an old girl
when I married you. You are infertile too; you deserve
to be beaten.’ Then he beats me and tells me that ‘if you
feel uncomfortable here, go to your father’s house.”
Marital instability: When couples realized that they
could not have a child, difﬁculties increased and the
distance between the couples broadened. The mental
pressure weakened the marriage and even caused
divorce. Most participants felt they had lost trust in their
husbands, and thought their husbands were no longer
interested in them. “I think that my husband is betraying
me. He may marry another woman to have a child. This
issue always worries me.” “My husband comes to the
house and says that ‘I want to have a child, and until
when should I wait to have a child?’ He is right because
if he would have married another woman, she would
have given him a child by now.” The fear that their
husbands may re-marry other women was consistent in
all narratives of participants. One explained, “For a
woman like me who is infertile, and her husband can
legally re-marry another woman, it is obvious that living
only as a couple becomes boring and causes the couples
to lose their patience, and their affectionate relationship
is interrupted.” Culturally, procreation is believed to
help sustain a generation and stabilize the family. Also,
as a form of social security, the child would support the
parents in their old-age. (Dyer, 2007) One participant
explained, “My husband tells me that he will die without
having heirs to look after him and inherit him. I feel that
it is his right to have a child, but I cannot bring him a
baby.”

Discussion
This study provides infertile women’s perspectives
about infertility in the Ashanti culture which is one of
the typical Ghanaian cultures. Infertility is a common
reproductive health problem in developing countries,
which frequently carries negative psychosocial
implications. It has been reported that infertility and its
treatment among affected women lead to mental,
physical, and social distresses.18 Our study found that
negative experiences of infertile women include:
“abuse”, “marital instability”, “social isolation”, and
“loss of self-esteem”. The results of a similar qualitative
study conducted in Africa among infertile women found
loss of self-esteem, anxiety, depression, hopelessness,
guilt, marital difﬁculties, loss of social status, and abuse
as consequences of infertility19 Our ﬁndings agree with
this previous study. Infertility has been suggested as a
major cause of divorce and abandonment.20 In the
present study, childbearing was seen as the purpose of
marriage and the absence of children might cause
marital problems. The result of a similar study in the
urban Muslim population in Bangladesh showed that
infertile women experienced a loss of purpose in life,
instability in their marriages, stigma, and partner
violence.21 In accordance with the cultural marriage
practice in Akan, Ghana, if it is identiﬁed that a man or
woman is infertile after marriage, they can be separated
from each other.26 However, the woman rarely separates
from her husband due to his infertility. In contrast, when
infertility is attributable to the woman, there are more
possibilities for divorce, physical and psychological
punishments. Husbands sometimes take a second wife,
if the ﬁrst wife does not desire to separate from her
husband. The present study revealed that physical and
psychological violence were suffered by participants

Social isolation: For most participants, infertility had
negative social consequences and bothered them. Most
of the infertile women asserted that they did not like to
participate in social activities and preferred being alone:
“I like to be alone at home and do not like to go
anywhere. A woman who does not have a child must
stay at home.” “I am really tired because people always
ask me ‘When are you going to have a kid?’ For this
reason, I prefer to stay at home. It is a fact that people
talk about their children at parties, and a woman like me
who suffers from infertility cannot talk about this issue
and I ﬁnd it very painful.” In some cases, relatives
avoided the infertile couples and have limited contact
with them. “Ever since my relatives understood that I
This is an Open Access Article under the CC BY License

Postgraduate Medical Journal of Ghana

71

doi: 10.60014/pmjg.v12i2.336

September 2023

Sefogah PE et al.

because of their infertility."My husband is not
supportive at all. He knows he could have more children
from other relationships if he wants," says a participant,
who sold her inheritance (a plot of land) to pay for one
cycle of in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment that cost
about six thousand United States Dollars in the city were
this study was conducted. Unfortunately, her treatment
was unsuccessful. The public Hospitals in Ghana do not
provide assisted reproductive technology services;
hence patients receive care only from private facilities
where payments are made out of pocket.
"At this rate, it will take me another ten years to save
enough money for a second IVF treatment cycle, and by
then I will be too old," she cried out of despair. "We
cannot afford it. I am going to die without my own
biological child." Previous research indicate that
infertile women constitute a particularly vulnerable
group with poor reproductive health and deserve
attention and care in their own right.22 Our study found
that couples’ relatives interfered in the marriages of
infertile couples. Families’ interferences, negative
attitudes towards infertile couple, and behavior of
persons around them cause psychological problems for
affected couples.23
Consistently, the index study showed that infertile
women avoid participating in parties and social
gatherings because of fear that relatives might enquire
about their infertility. Isolating behaviors reported
during situational crises related to infertility include
self-talk and sleep. Reportedly, women experience the
feeling of social isolation more than their male
counterparts in infertile marriages .24 Our study also
found that infertile women lost their self-esteem due to
their infertility. Self-esteem is very important for
infertile women because it plays a role in the
development of the personality. In the absence of high
self-esteem, infertile women may suffer depression and
the dreaded feeling of facing unpleasant circumstances
due to their infertility.25

Trustcare hospital has the inherent limitation of a single
center study.
Conflict of Interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Funding
The study received no funding.

Acknowledgement
Special appreciations to the Management and Staff of
the Trustcare Specialist Hospital, Kumasi for their
assistance in the conduct of this study.

References
1. Adadevoh KB. Sub-fertility & infertility in Africa:
Report of an International Workshop on Correlates
of Sub-Fertility and infertility in Africa held at the
Conference Centre, University of Ibadan, Nigeria
November 26-30, 1973 with the support of the
International Development Research Centre,
Ottawa, Canada and the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
In: Adadevoh KB, editor. International workshop
on correlates of sub-fertility and infertility in
Africa. Ibadan; 1973. p. 114.
2. Ombelet W, Cooke I, Dyer S, Serour G, Devroey
P. Infertility and the provision of infertility medical
services in developing countries. Hum Reprod
Update. 2008; 14:605–621.
3. Gerais ARH. Infertility in Africa. Popul Sci. 1992;
12: 25–46.
4. Wiersema NJ, Drukker AJ, Dung MBT, Nhu GH,
Nhu NT, Lambalk CB. Consequences of infertility
in developing countries: Results of a questionnaire
and interview survey in the South of Vietnam. J
Transl Med. 2006; 4: 1–8.
5. Larsen U. Primary and secondary infertility in subSaharan Africa. Int J Epidemiol. 2000; 29:285–
291.
6. Vahidi S; Ardalan A; Mohammad K. Prevalence of
primary infertility in the Islamic Republic of Iran
in 2004-2005. Asia Pac J Public Heal. 2009;
21:287–293.
7. WHO. Ghana Factsheets of Health Statistics 2010.
2010.
8. Umezulike, AC; Efetie E. The psychological
trauma of infertility in Nigeria. Int J Gynaecol
Obstet. 2004; 84:178–180.
9. Widge A. Seeking conception: Experiences of
urban Indian women with in vitro fertilisation.
Patient Educ Couns. 59:226–233.
10. Foote, Robert H; Brockett, Charles C; Kaproth
MT. Motility and fertility of bull sperm in whole
milk extender containing antioxidants. Anim
Reprod Sci. 2002; 15:13–23.
11. Stephenson P, Wagner M. Tough Choices: In Vitro
fertilization and the reproductive technologies.
Temple University Press; 1993.
https://books.google.com.gh/books?idLJ734leiBx4

Conclusion
Infertility imposes significant impairment on the
emotional, psychological and social well-being of
women in the Ashanti region which is a reflection of
what pertains in other Ghanaian cultures. These include
isolation, abuse, loss of self-esteem, and marital
instability. Psychological supportive counseling and
subsidizing infertility treatment costs may be helpful
interventions to mitigate the psycho-socio-emotional
distress among women with infertility.

Declarations
Limitations of this study
This study focused on infertile women and infertility
with female factors. Therefore, future studies are
recommended to explore the perspectives of infertile
women’s husbands and address the situation among
couples with male factor infertility. Recruiting women
with infertility attending the gynaecology clinics at the
This is an Open Access Article under the CC BY License

Psychological Experiences of Women with Infertility

72

doi: 10.60014/pmjg.v12i2.336

September 2023

Vol. 12 No. 2

C
12. Abebe MS, Afework M, Abaynew Y. Primary and
secondary infertility in Africa: systematic review
with meta-analysis. Fertil Res Pract. 2020; 6:1–11.
13. Abekah-Nkrumah G, Abor PA. Socioeconomic
determinants of use of reproductive health services
in Ghana. Health Econ Rev. 2015; 6:1–15.
14. Zahra Behboodi-Moghadam, Mahvash Salsali HEAMVFR. Experiences of infertility through the
lens of Iranian infertile women: a qualitative study.
Japan J Nurs Sci. 2013; 10:41–46.
15. Cwikel J, Gidron Y, Sheiner E. Psychological
interactions with infertility among women. Eur J
Obs Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2004; 117:126–131.
16. Elo S, Kyngas H. The qualitative content analysis
process. J Adv Nursing. 2008; 62: 107–115.
17. Akizuki Yuri, Kai I. Infertile Japanese women’s
perception of positive and negative social
interactions within their social networks. Hum
Reprod. 2008; 23:2737–2743.
18. March C. Management of Asherman’s syndrome.
Reprod Biomed Online. 2011; 23:63–76.
19. Hussain S. Motherhood and female identity:
Experiences of Childless Women of Two Religious
Communities in India. Asian J Women’s Stud.
2009;15.
20. Papreen N, Sharma A, Sabin K, Begum L, Ahsan
SK; Baqui AH. Living with infertility: Experiences
among urban slum populations in Bangladesh.
Reprod Health Matters. 2000; 8:33–44.

This is an Open Access Article under the CC BY License

Postgraduate Medical Journal of Ghana

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0968-8080(00)90004-1
21. Orji E, Kuti O, Fasubaa O. Impact of infertility on
marital life in Nigeria. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.
2002;79: 61–62.
22. Ramezanzadeh F, Aghssa MM, Abedinia N, Zayeri
F, Khanafshar N, Shariat M et al. A survey of
relationship between anxiety, depression and
duration of infertility. BMC Women’s Health.
2004; 4: 1–7.
23. Toscano S, Montgomery R. The lived experience
of women pregnant (including preconception) post
In-vitro fertilization through the lens of virtual
communities. Health Care Women Int. 2009;
30:1014–1036.
24. Naab F. Every month becomes a funeral when they
menstruate: African women’s beliefs about couple
infertility. 2014; 2:92–100.
25. Gerrits T, Shaw M. Biomedical infertility care in
Sub-Saharan Africa: A social science review of
current practices, experiences and
viewpoints. Facts Views Vis Obgyn. 2010;2:194207.
26. Sarfo JD-W. The reproductive rite: (in) Fertility in
the Ashanti and Ancient Hebrew Context. In:
Sherwood Y, editor, The Bible and feminism:
Remapping the field. Oxford: Oxford Academic.
2018. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198722618.
003.0031

73

doi: 10.60014/pmjg.v12i2.336

