Original Article

Experiences of burn patients in Ghana: A qualitative study
at the Korle‑Bu Teaching Hospital in Accra
ABSTRACT
Background: Statistics on the trends of burn injuries in Ghana, Africa, and the world at large indicate unacceptable number of lives lost
through burns. Aside these deaths, individuals who survive suffer lots of physical and psychological burdens as a result of long hospitalization
and pain from the regular wound dressing, and physical deformities in severe cases. This study focused on the sources of burns, types of burns,
how burns are managed, and the effects of burns on victims to enable an empirical basis for formulating preventive educational materials for
awareness creation and preventive education.
Methodology: We employed a case study design and purposively selected 20 participants made up of 15 adults and 5 caregivers of children
with burns who were receiving treatment at the Reconstructive, Plastic Surgery, and Burns Centre of the Korle‑Bu Teaching Hospital in Accra
for the study. In‑depth interviews were conducted with participants to ascertain the type and sources of burns incurred, and their experiences
with the study facility and living with the consequences of burns. Recorded interviews were transcribed and analyzed based on themes with
the study objectives as a guide.
Results: The majority of participants had third‑degree burns from explosive sources either at their place of residence or the work‑place. The
physical and psychological effects of burns have been unbearable. Their encounter with the study facility has been pleasant with few challenges
related to the cost of treatment, some personnel, and waiting time.
Conclusion: Massive education on burns and the prevention of accidental burns in Ghana is needed. Training of more personnel to handle
patients in a professional manner and cost of care of burn patients should be placed on the agenda of all relevant stakeholders in the country.
Keywords: Burn patients, experiences, Ghana

INTRODUCTION

damages and burns from hot liquids and steam (American
Burns Association, 2011).[2]

A burn is any injury to the skin or tissue instigated by
heat (thermal), electricity, chemicals, or radiation (Temu‑Justin
et al., 2008).[1] There are various types of burns dependent on
what caused the burn injury. They may include thermal burn,
chemical burn, electrical burn, and radiation burn. A thermal
burn is any damage that occurs when the skin comes into
contact with hot items, such as boiling water, steam, or hot
cooking. When a corroding substance such as a strong acid
comes into contact with the body’s tissue, a chemical burn
occurs. An electrical burn occurs when an electrical current
passes through the body. A radiation burn is injury to the
skin or tissue caused by exposure to radiation. It is noted
that the most common causes of burns are fire or flame
Access this article online
Website:

Quick Response Code

The human skin plays very important roles including
maintaining and supporting thermoregulation such as
Lily Yarney1, Elizabeth Yeboah2,
Rachael Hansen‑Garshong3
Department of Public Administration and Health Services

1

Management, University of Ghana Business School,
Department of Reconstructive Plastic Surgery and Burns

2

Centre, Korle‑Bu Teaching Hospital, 3Department of
Psychology, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana
Address for correspondence: Dr. Lily Yarney,
University of Ghana Business School, Accra, Ghana.
E‑mail: lyarney@ug.edu.gh
This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution‑NonCommercial‑ShareAlike 4.0 License, which allows others to
remix, tweak, and build upon the work non‑commercially, as long as appropriate credit
is given and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.

www.ijburns.com
For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com
DOI:
10.4103/ijb.ijb_18_19

How to cite this article: Yarney L, Yeboah E, Hansen-Garshong R.
Experiences of burn patients in Ghana: A qualitative study at the Korle-Bu
Teaching Hospital in Accra. Indian J Burns 2019;27:49-56.

© 2020 Indian Journal of Burns | Published by Wolters Kluwer - Medknow

49

Yarney, et al.: Experiences of burn patients in Ghana

ensuring fluid balance. It is made up of layers: epidermis,
dermis, and tissues (Kolarsick et al. 2011).[3] The epidermis is
the outermost cover of the skin. It serves as the water‑resistant
and protective wrap over the body’s surface (Sanders et al.,
1995).[4] The dermis is the cover of the skin underneath the
epidermis. It is made up of connective tissue and helps the
body withstand stress and strain. The basement membrane
firmly joins the dermis to the epidermis (Kolarsick et al.,
2011).[3] Anatomically, it has two parts: the papillary region,
which is shallow and adjacent to the epidermis and a deep,
thicker area called the reticular region (James et al., 2005).[5]
The hypodermis lies below the dermis, and though it is not
part of the skin, it is usually not separated from the dermis
and the epidermis when discussing. In addition to supplying
the skin with nerves and blood vessels, it also fastens the
skin to underlying bone and muscle (Huckfeldt et al., 2015).[6]
Below the hypodermis lie muscle, fascia, tendons, ligaments,
and bone. Muscle aids the body to move and also protects
the nerve cells. Fascia, tendons, and ligaments make up the
body’s “connectors.” These connector tissues are all made
of collagen but help to join different parts of the body. The
ligaments join bone to bone, tendons link muscle to bone,
and fascia protects muscle and separates internal organs
of the body. Bone tissue plays protective roles, serves as a
structure, and aids in movement (Huckfeldt et al., 2015).[6]
Burns can result in minor damages or can lead to a dangerous
emergency, depending on the concentration of the heat, the
expanse of tissues burned, and how long the skin had been
exposed to the heat. A lot of individuals suffer from infirmities
and deformities as a result of burns (Van Hasselt, 2008).[7] When
categorizing the thickness of a burn, a system of classification
that is mostly adapted involves assigning a degree to the
injury, from first degree through fourth degree (Reed and
Pomerantz, 2005).[8] A superficial or first‑degree burn is a
painful damage, typically confined to the epidermis. Thus,
it involves only the top layer of the skin (Hettiaratchy and
Dziewulski, 2004).[9] Usually, first‑degree burns are not severe
and affect only the superficial epidermis. They are hardly
reported to hospitals for treatment/management (Reed and
Pomerantz, 2005).[8]
Another type is a superficial partial‑thickness burn, which
may also be classified as a first or second degree. This kind
of injury mostly spreads into the epidermis, and perhaps
the papillary layer of dermis, and normally heals without
leaving scars. It is usually painful with the skin becoming
pink (Mertens et al., 1997).[10] According to Temu‑Justin
et al. (2008),[1] in the second‑degree burns the skin is light, red
and blistery, swollen to some extent with moistly discharge
50

and severe pain. For a deep partial thickness burns, tissue
damage encompasses the epidermis, papillary dermis,
and reticular dermis. The portion of dermis might still be
undamaged, which may provide some amount of protection
through the healing process. The color of the skin is red to
pale pink (Bessy, 2007).[11] According to Huckfeldt (2013),[12]
if the majority of the dermis is injured, this damage could
lead to scarring which might lead to functional and motor
problems, particularly if the damage involves a joint area.
Sterling, Heimbach and Gibran (2010) [13] explained
full‑thickness or a third‑degree burn to include the epidermis,
the two layers of dermis across the basement membrane into
subcutaneous tissue. Here, the immediate region of damage
differs in deepness, causing changes in skin color which could
range from a dark waxy red to waxy white or black (Mertens
et al., 1997).[10] According to Temu‑Justin et al. (2008),[1] this
kind of injury causes nerves and blood vessels damages. The
initial pain may be little or there may have no sensation,
dependent on which nerve tissue is damaged. The burn area
is yellow, cherry red and becomes dry and leathery (Mazzeo
et al., 2014).[14] Even after appropriate treatment and care,
scarring is very common (Huckfeldt, 2013).[12]
In fourth degree or deep full‑thickness burns, there is a lot
of tissue damage. The damages outspread the covers of the
skin and the intravenous tissue. They may comprise the
destruction of muscle, tendon, and perhaps bone. Tissue
damage is evident, and the color of the skin is frequently
black (Huckfeldt, 2013).[12] Often, extensive debridement
and considerable tissue reconstruction, like muscle flaps are
necessary to aid healing.
Burn injuries cause distress to lots of people worldwide,
and they present with both physical and psychological
stressful forms of trauma. This is because of the extensive
hospitalizations they implicate and the likelihood of resulting
in serious physical as well as psychological sequelae. Again
WHO (2008),[15] emphasized that burn injuries may come with
prolonged or even permanent trauma. Burns constitute one of
the most common household injuries and thus, a major cause
of morbidity and mortality. Burn injuries are very complex
and distressing; thus, caring for patients who have suffered
serious damages from burns necessitates a holistic way of
treatment with effort from a multidisciplinary team which
may include physicians, surgeons, nurses, psychologists, and
dieticians, just to mention few.
The World Health Organization statistics in the year 2000,
reported that about 833, 773 children in Africa <5 years
old suffered fire‑related injuries/deaths. In 2002 estimated

Indian Journal of Burns / Volume 27 / Issue 1 / January-December 2019

Yarney, et al.: Experiences of burn patients in Ghana

death rates of fire‑related burns worldwide were 322,000,
of this number, 40,000 of them occurred in sub‑Saharan
Africa (WHO, 2002).[16] In Africa, fire‑related mortality rates are
more common compared with recorded rates in high‑income
countries (i.e., about 6 of every 100,000 people in the African
population as compared to about 1 death in every 100,000
people in high‑income countries) (Mock et al., 2008).[17] These
statistics are highly unacceptable considering the fact that
most burn injuries are preventable.
In Ghana, the Reconstructive Plastic Surgery and Burns
Centre (RPSBC) at Korle Bu Teaching Hospital (KBTH) is only
one of its kind in the country and the West African Sub‑Region.
Statistics from the RPSBC at Korle Bu show that in the year
2013, 302 people (181 males and 121 females) who suffered
burn injuries were admitted to the unit. Of this number, 162
were children and 140 were adults. A total of 66 people
died constituting 21.9% of the total number of burn cases
that were recorded at the unit (RPSBC- Korle Bu Teaching
Hospital, 2013). In 2014, a total of 283 people (130 males and
153 females) were brought to the unit. Children constituted
51.6% (146 of 283) and adults constituted 48.4% (137 of
283). The rate of mortality recorded in 2014 was 24% (i.e.,
68 deaths). Furthermore in 2015, a total of 248 people who
have suffered burn injuries (138 males and 110 females)
reported to the unit, with 145 being children and 103 being
adults. As of September 2015, a total of 41 deaths had been
recorded at the unit (Reconstructive Plastic Surgery and
Burns Centre - Korle Bu Teaching Hospital, 2016).[18] A major
percentage of the workload for the Plastic Surgery and Burns
Units are burns cases, and children make up about 45% of
these burns cases recorded.
Burns remain a common public health problem in Ghana,
this is because a growing number of both the urban and
rural Ghanaian populations now depend on gas cylinders for
cooking. These cylinders are mostly kept indoors for security
reasons. In addition, there are incidences of roadside cooking
over open flames. These practices have the tendency to cause
accidental burn injuries both in children and adults. Statistics
on the trends of burn injuries in Ghana, Africa, and the world
at large indicate the number of lives lost through burns.
Aside these deaths, individuals who survive suffer lots of
psychological burden as a result of long hospitalization and
pain from the regular wound dressing.
Most studies done in the area of burns are focused on the
prevalence rate of burns, chronic pain associated with burns
in general, pain beliefs, caregivers’ well‑being, coping, and
quality of life. This study focused on the sources of burns,
types of burns, how burns are managed, and the effects of

complications of burns on victims to enable an empirical
basis for formulating preventive educational materials for
awareness creation and preventive education aimed at
reducing the incidence of burns, especially in children and
its related complications in Ghana.
METHODOLOGY
Study design, population, sampling, and sample size
We employed a case study design to uncover the experiences
of burns patients, the management and effects of burns on
their lives. A case study design was used so we could study
holistically the effects of burns and care for burn patients in the
study facility from the perspectives of patients and caregivers
of burn patients (Creswell, 2013).[19] The population of interest
for the study was all burn patients receiving treatment at
the RPSBC of the Korle‑Bu Teaching Hospital in Accra, their
caregivers, and their health‑care providers.
Purposive sampling technique was employed throughout
the study. The RPSBC of the Korle‑Bu Teaching Hospital
in Accra was purposively selected because it serves as the
central referral point for most burn cases in the metropolis
and in Ghana as a whole where specialist services such as
reconstructive and plastic surgery are required. In addition,
the RPSBC is where burn patients and their caregivers could
easily be located for the study. Accra is highly populated and
made up of diverse ethnic groups (AMA, 2011);[20] hence, it
is more representative of the Ghanaian society than other
cities and towns of Ghana.
Fifteen burn patients five caregivers of children with burns,
totaling twenty participants were purposively selected for
the study. Burn patients selected were those who had been
diagnosed with having the first, second, or third‑degree burns
by a qualified medical officer, was receiving treatment at the
RPSBC, was 18 years and above, and was willing to participate
in the study. Caregivers were also purposively selected based
on the fact that they care for burn patients who were children,
and were willing to be part of the study.
Data collection methods, instruments
The study employed qualitative methods of data collection.
Thus, the qualitative data were made up of responses
from in‑depth interviews using in‑depth interview guide.
The instrument for collecting the data for the study
were pretested in a hospital in Accra to determine their
appropriateness in collecting the desired data in English or
in the local Twi language, which is spoken by most Ghanaian.
The in‑depth interviews with patients and caregivers were
conducted at their convenience in a location at the hospital

Indian Journal of Burns / Volume 27 / Issue 1 / January-December 2019

51

Yarney, et al.: Experiences of burn patients in Ghana

or in the comfort of their homes. This was determined by
the interviewees. All the interviews were conducted by the
second and third authors who are MPhil degree holders in the
Social Sciences and have enormous experience in qualitative
data collection.
Ethical clearance
Before the start of the study in 2018, ethical approval was
obtained from the Ethics Committee of Humanities, University
of Ghana with the study protocol. All participants were provided
with written informed consent before they participated in the
study. Following information and explanation on the rationale,
purpose, procedures, confidentiality, participation and rights,
risks and benefits, voluntary, and right to withdrawal at any
point without prejudice to participants, participants were
given the opportunity to choose between signing or thumb
printing the written consent form before their involvement
in the study. Permission was also sought from participants to
publish the findings of the study with anonymous quotes. This
was done by asking participants to also sign or thumbprint
another portion on the written informed consent form.
Data analysis
The data were recorded using electronic recorder during
the interview sessions with the interviewees; in addition,
handwritten notes were also taken during the interviews.
The audio recorded responses and notes taken from the
interviews were translated verbatim in the English language
separately by two data entry experts and transcribed in a
word processing application. The experts then came together
for consensus building by reviewing their transcripts and the
original recordings, the transcripts and field notes were stored
as files. Manual coding was then be used to select themes
based on the research tools and objectives. Information on the
themes were compared using similarities and differences in
views of participants and quotes were selected to instantiate
the themes using pseudo‑names to maintain anonymity. Thus,
PR, and CG‑R were used to represent patient respondent (PR)
and caregiver respondents (CG-R), respectively.
RESULTS
The findings from the study have been presented and discussed
under five main sub‑headings, namely sociodemographic
characteristics of respondents, type of burns, sources of
burns and area of the body affected, effects of burns, and
management of burns.
Sociodemographic characteristics of burn‑patient
participants
Fifteen burns patients whose ages ranged from 25 to
62 years participated in the study. The majority, that is, 13
52

of them were between the age group of 25 and 40 years,
and the remaining two were 50 and 62 years old. Thirteen
of them were male and only 2 were female. More than
50% (8/15) of these burns‑patient respondents had tertiary
education, while the remaining 7 had either primary
or secondary education. Two of the respondents were
tertiary level students, and 13 were either employed in
the formal sector or the informal sector. Thirteen of these
participants hail from the Greater‑Accra Region with the
remaining two from the Bono‑East and Central Regions of
the country [Table 1].
The caregiver respondents were all mothers of children with
burns who were aged between 19 and 38 years. Two of them
had no formal education, two had primary education, and
one had secondary education. Three were unemployed, and
two were traders [Table 2].
Types and sources of burns presented at the facility
The majority of respondents (8 of 15 adults and 3
of 5 children) had suffered third‑degree burns, 3 adults
and 2 children had second degree burns, and the remaining
4 adult participants could not tell of the degree of burns
they had.
The sources of burns as reported by participants included
mainly gas explosion either at home/hostel or the workplace,
melting metals at the workplace, home fire outbreak with
unknown source, explosion in the car while driving and
electricity in the home/hostel or workplace.
“My burns occurred at the work place, we were melting the metals
and it accidentally poured on us.”…….PR1.
“….It was electrical burns. My kettle got spoilt and I had to use
heater to heat water for something. I don’t really know what
happened I tripped and pushed the bucket I was heating the water
in and sat in the water but because the heater was still in the socket
I got electrocuted and got burnt…….PR11.
“ I had a third degree burn as a result of gas explosion in the course
of my working for a school as a welder”.…….PR9.
Area of body affected
The majority of participants had their whole body affected by
burns (especially those with gas explosion sources). Others
had their faces, upper and lower limbs, and hand and waist
down affected.
“……My whole body, from head to toe was affected, but the most
serious parts are my face, chest and my hands ……… PR 8.

Indian Journal of Burns / Volume 27 / Issue 1 / January-December 2019

Yarney, et al.: Experiences of burn patients in Ghana

Table 1: Demographic characteristic of burn patient respondents
Respondent
PR1
PR2
PR3
PR4
PR5
PR6
PR7
PR8
PR9
PR10
PR11
PR12
PR13
PR14
PR15

Age (years)

Gender

Level of education

Employment status

Area of residence (region)

31
30
25
50
40
29
30
30
25
62
40
29
26
40
27

Male
Male
Female
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Male

Secondary
Secondary
Secondary
Tertiary
Tertiary
Tertiary
Secondary
Primary
Tertiary
Tertiary
Primary
Primary
Tertiary
Tertiary
Tertiary

Factory hand
Self employed
Secretary
Banker
Welder
Internet installer
Self employed
Welder
Student
Engineer
Seamstress
Unemployed
Student
Businessman
Businessman

Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Bono‑East
Greater Accra
Greater Accra
Central
Greater Accra
Greater Accra

PR: Patient respondent

Table 2: Demographic characteristic of care givers of burn patients
Caregiver
CG‑R1
CG‑R2
CG‑R3
CG‑R4
CG‑R5

Age (years)

Gender

Level of education

Employment status

Relationship to patient

35
19
30
30
38

Female
Female
Female
Female
Female

Primary
Primary
None
None
Secondary

Unemployed
Unemployed
Trader
Unemployed
Trader

Mother
Mother
Mother
Mother
Mother

Effects of burns on participants
Physiological and physical effects
All adult patient participants lamented that excruciating pain
and discomfort was the first effect of burn they had to battle
with. They reported of sleeplessness at night for several days
after burns resulting from pain at the affected parts of their
bodies. Some complained of severe and unbearable pain with
itching all over the body that they thought they would not
survive the burns. Participants also reported of wounds, skin
discoloration, scars, keloids, amputation of toes, and arm,
deformed ear, impaired vision in the afternoons, and total
blindness as the consequences of their encounter with burns.
These physiological and physical effects of burns were described
by all participants as very uncomfortable and unbearable.
“……. as you can see, I have scars all over my body with a
deformed ear, very sad”. PR1
“I have several problems after my burns. I still have pains, my
skin’s colour is changed and become partially darker with itching
sensation most of the time, and to crown it all I have difficulty
seeing anything clearly especially in the afternoons”….PR3.
“My biggest problem is the keloids on my body after the burns, I
don’t know if I can ever recover and have my beautiful skin back,
hmmm.”…………. PR4.

For those participants who have had physical deformities from
burns, some reported that they have difficulty performing
daily personal routine activities and need assistance everyday,
others reported they cannot work anymore.
“I have distracted activities and school attendance is poor. I depend
mostly on my family members especially my mother for assistance
in almost everything I do”………PR13.
“Going about my daily routine has now come to halt. I just have
to sit and ask that it be done for me. Am helpless without my
hands”………….PR14.
“Hmm, I don’t engage in any activity I just watch it being done
for me”………PR11.
“…….It’s very difficult for me, I can’t work anymore and I’m a
burden for my family”………PR4.
Psychological effects of burns on participants
Participants reported mixed feelings of the psychological
impact of burns on their lives. Some respondents feel
stigmatized against in various ways, especially being
described and tagged by their deformity. They also expressed
that they are stigmatized and looked at in very uncomfortable
ways. This has led to some of them staying indoors most of

Indian Journal of Burns / Volume 27 / Issue 1 / January-December 2019

53

Yarney, et al.: Experiences of burn patients in Ghana

the time, and hence, complained of loneliness. Some reported
to have been assigned new jobs because of the discolorations
they have suffered as a result of burns, while others indicated
that they lost some jobs from their customers because they
are deformed, and some even expressed fear of losing their
spouses. Thus:
“It’s not been easy at all for me after my burns, this is because I
used to be Teller at the bank where I work and was interacting
with a lot of people, but now I’m no more a teller I work in the
back office”…………PR4.
“I lost a lot of jobs from my customers after my burns, though I
can still do the jobs, and I believe it’s because of the way I look, in
fact, I have changed a lot physically”.……PR 6.
“………… you see, I’m very young, and afraid of losing my wife
because of my deformity”….PR7.

facility. Some participants recommended that the burns
centre should introduce the National Health Insurance
Scheme, to subsidize for some of the costs of treatment of
burns at the centre.
“What I don’t like about them is their fees. It is too expensive.
When I was discharged it took about a month for my mother to
raise the money to settle the bills.
“I think they should use health insurance more and it will help
reduce the bills that people pay at the centre”……. PR1.
“I was thinking about how I was going to raise the money for his
bills because I was not able to go to the market. But God being
so good I had someone to pay for his bills for free. Some company
came to pay for the children at the ward and I was fortunate”…….
CG‑R3.

Some participants, however, reported that they had not really
experienced any form of stigma or discrimination resulting
from their deformity.

“Initially it wasn’t easy but with the help of the psychologist and
some of the student doctors I got to know that that is not the end
of my life and I can do something beneficial with my life with one
hand ……….PR3.

“I have not faced any yet because I see that everybody is okay with
me and I get along well with my family and friends”……….PR 12.

“The only problem I have with them is that medicine at the pharmacy
is more expensive than the one across the street”……. PR10.

For the caregiver participants, this is what one of them had
to say:

Some participants specifically mentioned that some of the
nurses are not professional and empathetic in their dealings
with them (during dressing of their wounds). They reported
that some of the nurses were rude, especially toward patients
who could not pay their bills promptly.

“He plays with the children around all the time. You see he is young
so I do everything for him. But the small right finger the doctors
say they have to do another surgery to make it straight. But there
is no money”…….CG‑R2.
Management of burns
General management of burns prior to being transported
to study facility
Some of the participants indicated that they had water or oil
poured on their affected parts before transporting them to
the study facility; however, these interventions did not help
much in alleviating the pain and other effects of their burns.
Participants’ experience with the health facility and
personnel
Most of the participants reported satisfaction with the
medical management of their condition at the study facility
and the constant counselling and psychological therapy they
receive. They were however, not happy with the charges
at the facility, almost all participants complained about
the exorbitant fees of medications and consumables. They
reported that drugs and consumables were more expensive
at the facility than at the pharmacy shops outside of the
54

“…in this centre, some of the nurses are rude and they like
dealing with those who can afford to give them tips. They
are always nice to and attending to those who can give them
something…PR15.
“With the facility I don’t have issues, with the exception of some
of the nurses being rude and insulting patients….PR11.
Some patients also raised concerns about the long queues
they have to join to see a doctor. They explained that they
have to wait for long hours before they have access to
the consulting room of a doctor. They reported that this
sometimes takes about seven long hours of wait in their
painful state, this, patients reported as very uncomfortable.
“I think the waiting time at the OPD and where they do the dressing
should be reduced. There are instances that you will sit there from
morning to afternoon before it gets to your turn to see a doctor
or to have your wounds dressed……”PR12.

Indian Journal of Burns / Volume 27 / Issue 1 / January-December 2019

Yarney, et al.: Experiences of burn patients in Ghana

Experience with home and community care
The majority of participants reported that their families are
very supportive and very friendly. They explained that even
though some friends have abandoned them, they receive a
lot of love from their family and close loyal friends. Some
reported that their family members and caregivers have taken
over some of their chores. Some self‑employed burns patients
also reported to have hired assistants in their shops to help
in the daily running of their businesses.
“I have to employ someone to assist me at work because of my
new condition. I can’t do everything on my own…………” PR7.
“…….My friends have been very helpful in my recovery which helps
me maintain my sense of belongingness…….” PR 15.
One caregiver had this to say
“This is the first time and I’m really praying that I don’t go through
this trauma again with my children. My sister is not easy to go
through this, the ups and downs are too much that if care is not
taken you will fall ill alongside”……. CG‑R1.
DISCUSSION
Burn injuries represent a major cause of morbidity and
mortality globally and its occurrence is not specific to any
age group or population. Although the incidence of burn
injury has been noted to be decreasing in the Western
Countries, the rate of reduction is slower than other
diseases. However, Rybarczyk et. al., (2017)[21] indicated
that the burden of burns remains high in the sub‑Saharan
African regions. Tripathee and Basnet for example in a study
identified that majority of burn associated deaths occur in
low‑middle‑income countries and specifies the need for
public health interventions. In Ghana, the rate of mortality
recorded in 2014 was 24% (68 deaths). Currently, a total
of 248 people who have suffered burn injuries (138 males
and 110 females) reported to the unit, with 145 being
children (KBTH, annual report, 2017).[22]
From the findings, burn injuries of varying degrees are
common in Ghana. Despite this fact, the country lacks a
National Burn Repository, which makes it difficult to assess
the actual care and rehabilitation needed by survivors. Such
a facility would help in the measures in place to handle burns
survivors effectively.
Burn injuries perhaps represent the widest range of any
form of trauma. From the interviews with participants
of the study, respondents experience a lot of pain and
feelings of itching. The burden of burn injuries and lack
of adequate epidemiological data makes it challenging for

the policymakers to implement a proper strategic plan for
effective therapeutic care and burn prevention.
Although the house is considered to be a safe place, it was
cited as the setting for the occurrence of burn injuries. The
use of open fire for cooking, wearing loose‑fitting clothes,
and poorly regulated liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders
increase the risk of burn.
Similarly, with the narratives, the use of traditional open
fire (coal pot) and LPG cylinders have been reported, which
predispose the household to burns. Usually, LPG cylinders are
kept indoors for fear of being stolen and this makes it easy for
the cylinder to leak its content within the kitchen. In addition,
most households may avoid reporting problems associated
with their cylinders at the earliest possible time and instead
use heavy stones or wet clothes on the regulator. These
activities increase the occurrence of burns within the home
setting. Hence, education by the mass media on safety tips
will be helpful and can reduce the incidence of fire in homes.
More worrying is the fact that some burn patients experience
stigma and discrimination. Efforts should be made to
incorporate psycho‑therapy into the treatments of burns
patients. There is a need to educate the public to accept
and love patients despite their deformity. Religious bodies
can help with all‑inclusive activities, which will increase the
morale of survivors and also have a sense of belonging. This
will help patients with suicidal ideations to at least think
twice about their condition.
Home caregiving and support is a major component of the
management of burn patients and survivors’ disease as the
study has shown. It is thus, important that family members
and caregivers show love, compassion, and empathy as well
as provide psychological support to their family members
throughout their lives, for home caregivers who pass negative
comments on the condition to unintentionally demoralize
patients, special education plans should be targeted at them,
for behavior change.
At the management level, it is suggested that health‑care
providers, especially nurses be trained on emotional
intelligence, customer care, and relations and professionalism
to improve on their relations with clients. Management of the
hospital must also act on complaints brought in by patients.
In addition, the government must consider enrolling the
burns centre unto the national insurance scheme, to ensure
affordability and equal access to health for all, since a lot
of patients complained about the expensive services at the
center.

Indian Journal of Burns / Volume 27 / Issue 1 / January-December 2019

55

Yarney, et al.: Experiences of burn patients in Ghana

The study has revealed that burn patients in Ghana live with
a lot of distress, pain, low self‑worth stigma and loneliness
and therefore, much attention should be given to them. The
establishment of an effective National Burns Repository will
go a long way to help these survivors.

5.
6.

7.
8.

CONCLUSION

9.

Burns represent a significant public health problem in
Ghana considering our limited resources. Although Ghana
shares a huge burden of burn injury, studies concerning the
experience of burn patients are limited. The experience of
these burn survivors has been neglected. There is, therefore,
a need for clear policy interventions for the inclusion of burn
patients into the society.
Financial support and sponsorship
This study received partial funding from the University of
Ghana Business School Faculty Research Support.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

2.

3.
4.

56

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.

REFERENCES
1.

10.

Justin-Temu M, Rimoy G, Premji Z, Matemu G. Causes, magnitude
and management of burns in under-fives in district hospitals in Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania. East African journal of public health 2008;5:38.
American Burns Association, National Burns Repository, Dataset
version 7.0. 2011. Available from: http://www.ameriburn.org/ resources
publications.php. [Last accessed on 2018 Dec 10].
Kolarsick PAJ, Kolarsick MA, Goodwin C. Anatomy and physiology of
skin. Journal of the Dermatology Nurses’ Association 2011;3:203-13.
Sanders JE, Goldstein BS, Leotta DF. Skin response to mechanical stress:
Adaptation rather than breakdown- A review of the literature. Journal
of Rehabilitation Research and Development 1995;32:214-22.

19.

20.

21.

22.

James W, Berger T, Elston D. Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical
Dermatology, 10th ed. Saunders; 2005.
Huckfeldt R, Ouellet L, Richardson L, Taylor P, Werner P. Burns
assessment and management. Ansell Healthcare Products: Iselin, USA;
2015.
Van Hasselt EJ. Burns Manual (2nd ed.) Nederland: Brandwonden
Stichting (Dutch Burns Foundation); 2008.
Reed JL, Pomerantz WJ. Emergency management of pediatric burns.
Pediatric emergency care 2005;21:118-29.
Hettiaratchy S, Dziewulski P. ABC of burns: Introduction. British
Medical Journal 2004;328:1366-8.
Mertens DM, Jenkins ME, Warden GD. Outpatient burn management.
Nursing Clinics of North America 1997;32:343-64.
Bessey PQ. Wound care. In: Herndon DN, editor. Total Burn Care.
Edinburgh: Elsevier Saunders. 2007; p. 127-135.
Huckfeldt R. “Burn 101: Anatomy, Physiology & Pathophysiology”.
2013; Available from: http://youtu.be/y5_Zl8tIKP4. [Last accessed on
2014 Jun 20].
Sterling JP, Heimbach DM, Gibran NS. Management of the burn wound.
In: ACS surgery: Principles and practice; 2010.
Mazzeo AS, Price LA, Gerold KB. Burn care procedures. Roberts
and Hedges' Clinical Procedures in Emergency Medicine. 6th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
World Health Organization. A WHO plan for burn prevention and care;
2008.
World Health Organization. A WHO plan for burn prevention and care;
2002.
Mock C, Peck M, Peden M, Krug E. A WHO Plan for Burn Prevention
and Care, Geneva: World Health Organization; 2008.
Reconstructive Plastic Surgery and Burns Centre Report - Korle Bu
Teaching Hospital; 2016.
Creswell J. Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed
methods approaches; 2013. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13398-014-0173-7.2. [Last accessed on 2018 Sep 25].
AMA (Accra Metropolitan Assembly). Slum Situation Analysis Report
Participatory Slum Upgrading and Prevention: Millennium City of
Accra, Ghana (Nairobi: UN Habitat); 2011.
Rybarczyk MM, Schafer JM, Elm CM, Sarvepalli S, Vaswani PA,
Balhara KS, Jacquet GA. A systematic review of burn injuries in low-and
middle-income countries: Epidemiology in the WHO-defined African
Region. African journal of emergency medicine 2017;7:30-7.
Korle Bu Teaching Hospital. 2017 Annual Report: Korle-Bu Teaching
Hospital Accra, Ghana; 2017.

Indian Journal of Burns / Volume 27 / Issue 1 / January-December 2019

