Health Promotion International, 2024, 39, daae065
https://doi.org/10.1093/heapro/daae065
Article

Adolescent sexual and reproductive health literacy
needs: a sub-national level assessment in Ghana
Jacqueline Nkrumah1,*, , Aaron A. Abuosi2, Anita Asiwome Adzo Baku2, Lily Yarney2,
Gordon Abekah-Nkrumah2, and Cecil Randolph Tettey3
Department of Health Administration and Education, University of Education, Winneba, P. O. Box 25, Winneba Commercial
Street, Winneba, Central Region, 233, Ghana
2
Department of Health Services Management, University of Ghana Business School, P. O. Box 78, Volta Hall Road, Accra-Legon,
Greater Accra Region, 233, Ghana
3
University of Education, Winneba, Health Service Directorate, P. O. Box 25, Winneba Commercial Street, Winneba, Central
Region, 233, Ghana
1

Corresponding author. E-mail: jnkrumah@uew.edu.gh

*

Abstract
This study assessed young adolescents’ access and literacy challenges to sexual and reproductive health information and knowledge gaps in the Effutu Municipality in the Central Region of Ghana. We used a narrative design and a focus group discussion
method to glean data from 52 in-school adolescents, aged 11–15. Focus group discussions were conducted using a discussion
guide and data were processed using QDA Miner (version 6.0). We analyzed data thematically using an iterative process of data
validation, coding and recording. The participants had poor knowledge of the concepts of sexual and reproductive health and its
essential domains. Abstinence was the predominant sexual and reproductive health goal of the participants. Yet, many males
admitted to having sexual partners. There was difficult linguistic and physical access to structured and safe information. Personal
hygiene, signs of sexual maturation and abstinence were the predominant contents available to young adolescents. A revision of
adolescent health policies and strategies to embrace actions for improving unrestricted access to easy-to-read educational materials and adolescent health literacy is essential. Creating adolescent corners and introducing peer education in schools within
Effutu and other municipalities in the Central Region will be useful.
Keywords: adolescent sexual and reproductive health, information, access, literacy, knowledge promotion

INTRODUCTION
Sexual and reproductive health (SRH) is concerned
with the physical, mental and social well-being of
individuals. Social well-being in this context relates
to sexuality, matters of the reproductive system, its
functioning, and processes, which include maternal
and newborn health, family planning and adolescent
and youth reproductive health (Denno et al., 2015).
Adolescent sexual and reproductive health (ASRH)
issues are of great concern in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA)
(Melesse et al., 2020). The region is behind the rest of
the world’s regions on measures of reproductive health.
It accounts for a greater proportion of maternal deaths

and mother-to-child transmission of HIV (UNFPA,
2014). Even though there is a growing awareness of
contraceptives and HIV/AIDS, knowledge of sexually
transmitted infections (STIs), sexuality, reproduction and contraceptive services is largely inadequate
(UNFPA, 2014; Ghebreyohans et al., 2015; Kim et al.,
2019; Sully et al., 2020). Few women of reproductive
age use modern contraceptives. Among adolescents,
SRH constitutes a sizable proportion of the global burden of sexual ill-health (Morris and Rushwan, 2015).
Studies have found poor reproductive health attitudes,
and practices, and low perceptions of STIs and HIV
among adolescents of school-going age (UNFPA, 2014;

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for
reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on
the article page on our site—for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

Article

J. Nkrumah et al.

2

Contribution to Health Promotion

Manortey and Geh, 2018; Santos et al., 2019), which
is suggestive of gaps in literacy and knowledge of SRH
among adolescents in SSA.
Ghana has low family planning uptake and an
increased prevalence of STIs, especially chlamydia, HIV,
syphilis and Chlamydia trachomatis, in some regions of
the country (Nyarko et al., 2014; Osei-Yeboah et al.,
2018). The prevalence of STIs suggests a risk of STIs
in the population. Furthermore, teen motherhood is
a public health concern in Ghana. The statistics show
that 301 adolescent girls get pregnant every month, and
13 get pregnant daily (Ghana Web, 2021). Adolescent
girls aged 10–15 accounted for 2865 pregnancies
recorded in 2020. The Central Region has recorded a
year-on-year marginal decrease in teenage pregnancy
from 2016 (12 404 pregnancies) to 2020 (10 301 pregnancies). Yet, the region came third among the regions
with a higher rate of teen pregnancy in 2020 (Ghana
Web, 2021; City News Room, 2021). Most disturbing
is that many pregnancies occur among young adolescents between 10 and 15 years old. In 2020, 1327 out
of 56 443 adolescent pregnancies were recorded in the
region among adolescents aged 10–14 (Ghana Web,
2021; Gbagbo, 2020). Studies from the Central Region
also point to an increasing rate of sexual activities
among young adolescents in basic schools (Afriyie and
Essilfie, 2019; Gbagbo, 2020). These research findings
are congruent with anecdotal accounts from the public
health unit of the Municipal Health Directorate, which
shows an upsurge in pregnancy among basic school
pupils in the Effutu Municipality.
The Adolescent Health Service Policy and Strategy
(AHPS) (2016–2020) of Ghana was developed in 2016
to ameliorate adolescent health outcomes in Ghana.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study area
The study was conducted in the Effutu Municipality
in the Central Region of Ghana. The municipality
was selected based on research findings that 60% or
more of basic school adolescents are already in sexual relationships (Gbagbo, 2020). Also, anecdotal
accounts from the public health arm of the Municipal
Health Directorate (MHD) show that the municipality has no adolescent corners or school-based SRH
clubs for SRH learning. The Effutu Municipality has

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

• This study hones our understanding of
young adolescents’ sexual and reproductive health (SRH) literacy needs at the
sub-national level in Ghana.
• It identifies specific areas where young
adolescents may struggle to access, understand and use SRH information and services. Insight into these areas is valuable to
health promotors for developing materials
and interventions to improve adolescents’
health outcomes.
• Based on the findings, health promotors
can address potential barriers to understanding SRH information and minimize
disparities in information access among
young adolescents.

The policy prioritized among other things, the promotion of equitable access to appropriate and comprehensive, quality and cost-effective health information
and education for adolescents (Ghana Health Service,
2016). However, it is not yet known whether the strategies set out by the policy are effectively implemented
and whether it is achieving the set targets. Providing
access to health information and education as outlined
in the policy is an essential step in promoting protective
factors essential for reversing adverse SRH outcomes in
adolescents. However, literature on adolescents’ access
to SRH information under the new policy regime and
related literacy challenges is scarce. Obtaining data on
these domains is essential for designing literacy and
educational interventions that will prepare adolescents with the agency to make informed SRH choices
(Jones and Norton, 2007). Studies have shown the
value of general and SRH literacy in reducing recurrent pregnancy among adolescents (Bennett et al.,
2013; Dongarwar and Salihu, 2019). Thus, improving
access to easy-to-read SRH information among adolescents will empower them with the social skills to make
appropriate sexual health choices.
A plethora of evidence abounds on ASRH behavior,
knowledge, decision-making skills, and stigmatization in Ghana and SSA (Ivanova et al., 2019; Furry
et al., 2019; Ahinkorah et al., 2019; Finlay et al., 2020;
Tenkorang et al., 2021). Unfortunately, little is known
about young adolescents’ access to appropriate and
comprehensive SRH information in Ghana. While few
(30%) Ghanaian adolescents aged 10–14 can read at
the grade 3 level (UNICEF, 2022), there is a paucity
of literature on the health literacy levels of adolescents
in this age bracket in Ghana and SSA. Gaining insight
into the literacy and access barrier to SRH information and knowledge in young adolescents will be a
worthwhile step in identifying areas of intervention to
stimulate ASRH literacy and related outcomes. In this
study, we assess how young adolescents in the Effutu
Municipality in the Central Region of Ghana construct
meanings into SRH as a concept, their knowledge gaps
and barriers to information.

Adolescent sexual and reproductive health literacy needs

The quality of the qualitative work
We applied the principles of trustworthiness to
improve data quality during data collection and analysis. We maintained trustworthiness by relying on
four main criteria. They include credibility, transferability, dependability and confirmability (Stahl and
King, 2020; Bryman, 2016). To strengthen the credibility of the study’s data and results, we ensured that
the participants were well informed about the study
throughout the sampling to data collection stages.
We have also provided a detailed description of the
research design and the methods for gleaning and
analyzing data for purposes of transferability and
credibility.

Study design and population
The study used a narrative design and a focus group
discussion (FGD) method to gather data. This approach
allowed individual participants in the research to share
their lived experiences and perspectives on the SRH
issues of interest to the authors (Butina, 2015). The
design was valuable to understanding the meanings
young adolescents construct into SRH concepts and their
lived experiences regarding SRH information access, linguistic barriers and knowledge gaps. The study population included all in-school adolescents in grades 7 and
8, aged 11–15, living in the Effutu Municipality. This
age range was considered for this study due to the phenomenal record of pregnancy upsurges among young
adolescents in Ghana (UNFPA, 2022). Also, the age
group was considered to fill the gap created by the overconcentration of research on older adolescents (Melesse,
2020). Although, World Health Organization (2013)
classifies people, aged 10–14 as young adolescents, in
almost all the schools in the municipality, 7th and 8th
graders were 11 years or more. We, therefore, had to
work with adolescents within this age bracket. Pupils,
aged 16 and more who are in grade 9 and those without
parental consent and or failed to give verbal assent were
excluded from the study.

Sample size and sampling procedure
We recruited 52 in-school adolescents based on a fourstage sampling approach. Two ­sub-municipalities were
randomly picked in the first stage, including KojoBedu-North Low-cost and Winneba West. Three communities, namely, North Campus, Abasraba and Club
House, were randomly selected from the two sub-­
municipalities. The random selections were done using
Microsoft Excel (ME, 2013 version). We assigned
numerical codes to sub-municipalities and the communities. The codes were input into ME for the random
selection. Permission to enter the schools was provided by the MES and three schools were purposefully
selected, one from each community, based on religion,
academic performance, consent for participation and
data saturation. All participating schools gave written
informed consent after carefully considering the participants’ information. For purposes of anonymity, participating schools are labeled as schools 1, 2 and 3 for the
schools selected from North Campus, Abasraba and
Club House communities, respectively. School 1 is a
Presbyterian Mission School and was chosen from the
moderately performing schools. School 2 is an Islamic
school and was selected from the poorly performing
schools. School 3 is a local government school and
was chosen from the best-performing schools. The aim
of choosing these schools was to glean data on SRH
knowledge gaps and literacy challenges from varied
perspectives.
We initially projected to sample 60 in-school adolescents based on informed parental consent, participants’ verbal assent, the expected number of FGDs
and the group size. Six groups of 10 participants were
projected for the FGDs. The 10 participants per group
were premised on the optimal group size for FDGs
(Von Seggern and Young, 2003; Rabiee, 2004).
We explained the research purpose and procedures
to 108 participants from the three schools. Written
participant information and consent forms were given
to be sent to their parents for consideration and consent. Participants’ information and consent forms were
written in the English language, but provision was
made for an interpreter and a witness in the case of
illiterate parents. The participants’ information sheet
provided the personal contacts and email address of
the first author, so parents can seek further clarification or ask questions when necessary. Participants who
received parental consent were also given the option
to choose to participate by providing verbal assent.
Participants’ verbal assent was indicated on the parental consent forms since they were minors and making
them given a written assent is inconsequential. A total
of 65 parents signed the consent forms, and 52 adolescent males and females, aged 11–15, gave verbal assent
and participated in the FGDs.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

four sub-municipalities. They include Winneba East,
Winneba West, Essuekyir-Gyahadze and Kojo-BeduNorth Low-Cost. Each sub-municipality is further
divided into communities. It has a population of
83 695. Women of reproductive age (15–49 years)
and the expected number of pregnancies are estimated at 20 087 and 3348, respectively. Adolescents
aged 10–14 years are estimated to be 11 550 and
those aged 15–19 are 8872 (Trauma and Specialist
Hospital, 2021). Data from the Municipal Education
Service (MES) show that 49 basic schools, including 22 public and 27 private schools, are distributed
across the sub-municipalities.

3

J. Nkrumah et al.

4

Data collection instrument

Data collection
We held separate FGDs for male and female adolescents. The discussions were organized at the school
premises after school hours using separate classrooms
for male and female adolescents. The purpose was to
create a culturally appropriate atmosphere, devoid of
stigma and embarrassment and promote the credibility
of the data. Two out of the six FGDs were held for
male young adolescents made up of six participants per
group in schools 1 and 2. However, a group discussion
was held in school 3 because only three males from
that school assented to participate in the study. We held
four FGDs for the adolescent females with group sizes
ranging between seven and ten participants. In school
3, we held two female FGDs consisting of 10 participants per group. One FGD was held in school 1, using
10 female participants. In school 2, we held one FGD,
made up of seven female participants. Fewer male adolescents met the inclusion criteria than females, which
explains the differences in group size.
At the beginning of each group discussion, the moderators welcomed the participants and explained the
format of the discussion, the ground rules and the
expectations to them. While questions for the discussions were taken from the discussion guide, probes and
follow-up questions were used to clarify and expand
responses. The last author, a male practicing nurse with
a public health background moderated the male FGDs.
The first author who is a researcher and a lecturer,
moderated the female group discussions. The duration
of the group discussions ranged from 45 to 60 min.
Discussions were done in Fante (the widely spoken
language in the Effutu Municipality) and English.
Using two languages was useful in creating a friendly
atmosphere for unencumbered responses. Participants’

responses were recorded using audio recorders and
field notes. A male and female-trained research assistant took notes from the FGDs. The research assistants
were 4th-year undergraduate students, aged 22 and
23, respectively. Data were collected over 1 week in
February 2022. All participants were provided with
snacks since meetings were held after school, between
14:00 and 15:00 Greenwich Meridian Time (GMT).

Data analysis
Data from the study were analyzed thematically. Data
translation, transcription and coding were done in a
manner that will guarantee the reliability of the results.
We began by translating the discussions recorded in
the local language (Fante) into English-language text.
Two translators proficient in the English and Fante
languages did the translation. The translators were
graduate students, from the College of Languages,
University of Education, Winneba. Discussions done
in English (the audios) were transcribed and content
validity was performed on the transcripts to authenticate the responses. The first author compared the
transcribed audio with the field notes to ensure that
responses were accurately captured by the note-takers.
The translated and transcribed text was also compared
with the audios to ensure that participants’ views and
statements were captured completely and accurately by
the transcribers and translators.
Data were coded and processed using QDA Miner
(version 6.0). We coded data inductively (Fereday and
Muir-Cochrane, 2006) by working on the data set for
each FGD separately. One of the data sets was first
read through closely by considering the meanings
inherent in the text. Codes were created from portions
of the text that contain meaningful information. The
codes we created from the first dataset were applied
to the remaining datasets. However, additional codes
were created for the other datasets if previously created codes did not match a portion of the data or when
needed. This process was repeated on all the datasets
after 3 months to allow for comparison and consistency with the earlier codes and to make the study
results dependable. Saturation was achieved at two
levels. At the first level, saturation was reached when
no additional data were found after group discussion
in school 3. The authors decided to discontinue the
group discussion. The second level of saturation was
reached when no new codes were identified from the
transcripts. Codes were merged and grouped into
themes based on the main themes in the discussion
guide, using common patterns among them. Codes
that did not fit closely under the themes in the discussion guide were combined to create sub-themes. All
themes were compared against the data set for revision purposes. Relevant sentences and phrases were

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

We developed a discussion guide to moderate the
FGDs using insight from the literature reviewed on
adolescent SRH studies in SSA. The discussion guide
centered around how adolescents construct meaning
into the SRH concept, their knowledge of relevant
topic domains in SRH, access to SRH information
and associated literacy challenges. The questions were
structured around seven primary themes. Namely, (i)
the SRH concept and sources of information, (ii) SRH
information access and literacy challenges, (iii) contraceptives and methods, (iv) personal relationships
and risky sexual behaviors, (v) STIs, (vi) reproduction and related issues, (vii) SRH service utilization.
The guide was reviewed and validated by a Medical
Officer with expertise in health education and a public health expert. The authors revised the guide based
on the review comments of the two experts. (See the
Supplementary File for details on the discussion guide.)

5

selected to support the themes. Finally, the second and
third authors redefined the themes and sub-themes to
make them articulate and valuable. The themes and
illustrative quotes were finally checked and accepted
by the first five authors.

had two sub-themes: content available and literacy
challenges. Predominant sexual knowledge also had
two sub-themes, namely, sexual behavior and etiquette and sexual maturation. The themes and the
sub-themes are presented with illustrative quotes from
the participants.

Ethical consideration and ethics approval
The authors obtained written permission and
approval from the MES for the conduct of the study.
Written permission and informed consent were
taken from participating school heads and parents.
Written parental consent and participants’ verbal
assent formed the basis for inclusion into the FGDs.
Schools, parents and participants were adequately
informed about the study. Ethics approval was provided by the Ghana Health Service Ethics Review
Committee in October 2021, ethics approval number: GHS-ERC006/10/21.

RESULTS
The authors assessed young adolescents’ conceptualization of SRH, literacy challenges and knowledge
in the Effutu Municipality. Table 1 presents the background information of the participants (see the table
file for details). A total of 52 in-school adolescents
who submitted informed parental consent participated in the discussions. The mean age of participants
was 13 ± 1 years. The majority of the participants
were females (37) and were grade 7 pupils. Seven main
themes emerged from the analysis. They are: (i) views
on SRH (ii) SRH information sources and access, (iii)
contraception, (iv) predominant sexual knowledge,
(v) STIs, (vi) preferred SRH topic domains, (vi) SRH
goals. However, SRH information sources and access

Table 1: Background information of participants

Description

Freq (%)
N = 52

Age

Description

Freq (%)
N = 52

Grade level

12

9 (17%)

Grade 7

29 (56.%)

13

16 (30.7%)

Grade 8

23(44%)

14

14 (26.9%)

15

13 (25%)

Religion

Mean age

13 ± 1

Christianity

39 (75%)

Islam

23 (25%)

Gender
Male

15 (28.8%)

Female

37 (71.2%)

Constructed by authors, 2023.

Views on SRH
The participants’ perspectives on the concept of SRH
were somewhat unrelated to the concept. Some participants conceptualized SRH as personal hygiene and
socially approved mannerisms. Participants expressed
their ideas in the following statement:
SRH is how we keep our vagina. (Female, FGD,
school 1)
Sir, it is about keeping your reproductive organs
clean. For example, bathing twice daily and brushing your teeth. (Male, FGD, school 3)
Madam, it is how we keep ourselves clean as adults.
(Female, FGD, school 2)

Others also conceptualized SRH as socially approved
mannerisms and pubertal changes. Their views are captured in the following statement:
Madam, we need to protect ourselves by wearing decent dresses so that if older people see us,
we won’t have a problem with them, so they will
know that we are good girls…with this, no man
will also have sexual feelings for us. (Female, FGD,
school 3)
It is when an individual begins to develop during
his teenage. Sir, it is about changes that occur…
the boy or girl will start to develop. The girl will
start developing breasts, and the boy will grow ‘big’
eh!..., you know it Sir. (Male, FGD, school 3)

SRH information sources and access
Adolescent participants consulted diverse but mostly
informal sources for SRH information. Key sources
included relatives, teachers and books. According to
the participants, the only book source was the grade
8 integrated science textbook. Very few had internet
access and had ever tried searching for information
from Google. Examples of sources mentioned included
the following:
Madam, we get information from our parents,
teachers, and guidance and counseling people.
Madam, we also get information from wise teens
and older people. (Female, FGD, school 2)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

Adolescent sexual and reproductive health literacy needs

J. Nkrumah et al.

6

Sir, we are taught in school…. Yes, Sir, our teachers
sometimes teach them in our school lessons. (Male,
FGD, school 3)

SRH information within participants’ reach focused on
abstinence, sexual maturation and personal hygiene.
However, the content for males was quite distinct from
those given to female adolescents. While the males
mentioned issues related to sexual maturation, the
content from females seemed to center around abstinence and decent dressing. Participants mentioned the
contents below.
Sir, they said some physical, emotional, and psychological changes happen when adolescents develop.
The information is in our textbook. (Male, FGD,
school 3)
They teach us how to prevent ourselves from having
sexual intercourse. (Female, FGD, school 1)
Madam, they teach us to keep ourselves and avoid
visiting men in their rooms. They also teach us how
to dress in a good way. (Female, FGD, school 1)

Literacy challenges
There were mixed reactions to linguistic challenges,
whereas some participants said they could read and
understand information from textbooks, others suggested challenges and said some words were difficult
to read and understand. Some participants shared their
experiences in the following statements:
Yes, madam, we do not understand them. Massive
response. (Female, FGD, school 1)
Madam, as for me, if I do not understand, I check it
in the dictionary when I go home to find the meaning. (Female, FGD, school 3)
Madam, I use my parents’ phone to search for the
meaning of difficult words from Google. Yes, me
too. (Female, FGD, school 3)
Madam, the English language used is too big.
(Female, FGD, school 1)

Digital literacy and resources were also significant barriers to information access. Most adolescents
expressed interest in SRH information, but skills and
resource challenges hindered their curiosity. Some adolescents expressed their bother and said:

I do not have a smartphone. Madam,…I have not
searched for information on the internet before.
(Females, FGD, school 2)

Aside from literacy challenges, ASRH prejudice and
stigma were a noteworthy barrier. Young adolescents
have challenges opening up to adults on matters of
sexual health and reproduction. It was also observed
from the audio recordings and discussions that it was
more difficult for females to share views on sex and
sexuality than males. Participants, particularly females,
expressed their frustration and said:
Sometimes we have problems in our personal lives
and want explanations and guidance on what to do,
but we cannot ask our teachers, parents, or adult
family members. (Female, FGD, school 3)
Madam, whenever we try a conversation on matters
of sex, they get annoyed. They shout at us, saying
we are ‘bad’ and ‘spoilt’ children. (Female, FGD,
school 3)

Contraception
Oral contraceptives, particularly emergency contraceptives, male condoms, and the withdrawal method were
well-known among the participants. Among female participants, information on self-induced abortion seemed
widespread. Some female participants had these to say.
Madam, you can also do an abortion…like taking
a pack of paracetamol. Others use sugar and paracetamol with alcohol to do abortions. (Female,
FGD, school 2)
Madam, you can also use Nescafe. (Female, FGD,
school 2)
Madam, some people wear a condom, and others
use P-2 (i.e., postinor-2, an emergency contraceptive). (Female, FGD, school 1)
Madam, others use Lydia (i.e., an oral contraceptive
brand name). (Female, FGD, school 1)

While females were reserved about this topic and
were shy to share their experience on contraceptive
use, the males were outspoken and retorted in the following statement.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

Contents available

No. Sir, most of us do not have smartphones. It’s
like, I do not know how to use the internet to look
for information…yes if I get a smartphone, I will
learn how to look for such information. (Male,
FGD, school 1)

Adolescent sexual and reproductive health literacy needs

Adolescent participants were aware of where
they could source oral contraceptives and condoms.
Prominent among the sources were pharmacies,
chemical shops and hospitals. Others also mentioned
herbal medicine providers. The participants shared
their experiences in the following statements.
Sir, you will get some at the hospital. Yes, it is good
to get it from the hospital…I know someone who
went to get one there, so am sure it is good. (Male,
FGD, school 1)
Madam, Herbal Shops…eh, sometimes in the cars
when traveling. Some people boil concoctions and
drink them at home as contraceptives. (Female,
FGD, school 2)
Yes, some are herbs brought from the farm. The
herbal medicine people also have it. (Female, FGD,
school 2)

The adolescents were unaware that Family Health
Units in public hospitals and health centers provide
contraceptive services. Those who believed they could
get contraceptive services from hospitals expressed it in
the following statement.
Madam, you must go to the OPD to get the
­pregnancy-stopping medicines when you get to the
hospital. (Female, FGD, school 2)
No, madam, the abortion room is where you
can get one. No, not that place. It is the No,
not that place. It is the theatre. (Female, FGD,
school 1)

Madam, we have friends, and at other times we
learn and play together…but sexual intercourse in
this kind of friendship is not good. (Female, FGD,
school 3)
Madam, the opposite sex should not share a very
close friendship. Yes, madam, fondling the breast
and kissing are not ‘good’…. Yes, no pressing of
buttocks. (Female, FGD, school 1)

Participants were largely unaware of the classifications of sexual activities and their associated risks.
Vaginal intercourse was known, and pregnancy was
considered the only risk in sexual intercourse. Yet, some
males admitted to having sexual partners. Participants
expressed themselves in the following statement.
No, Sir, we do not have girlfriends. (Male, FGD,
school 2)
Yes, Sir, we have some. (Male, FGD, school 2)
Sir, getting pregnant and being a schoolgirl may
cause you to drop out.
Yes, Sir, it can also destroy one’s future. (Male,
FGD, school 3)

Few participants knew that condomizing during
sexual intercourse was a safe sex practice. To most
participants, safe sex is when sexual intercourse happens between regular sexual partners and in situations
where the female is not intoxicated with alcohol. Some
females shared the following views:
Madam, safe sex is when the lady avoids drunkenness so that if she gets pregnant, she can figure out
the father of her child. (Female, FGD, school 2)
Yes! Yes! Madam, unsafe sex is having sex while
drunk making you unable to figure out the partner.
(Female, FGD, school 2)

Predominant sexual knowledge
Participants demonstrated sound knowledge of signs
of sexual maturation, except menstruation. Other
areas of knowledge were etiquettes in personal
friendship and the dangers of early sexual activities.
These findings are discussed under the sub-themes
of sexual behavior, etiquette, and sexual maturation.

Sexual behavior and etiquette
Adolescent participants seemed abreast with the do’s
and don’ts in personal friendship. The following are
their views.

Signs of sexual maturation
The signs of sexual maturation were the predominant
knowledge among the participants. However, knowledge of the menstrual cycle and safe and unsafe periods
was lacking. Participants expressed their knowledge
and the lack of it in the following ways:
Sir, growing hair in the pubic areas is a sign that you
have reached puberty. Boys will begin to produce
sperm and start having wet dreams. (Male, FGD,
school 3)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

Sir, if the feeling for sex becomes unbearable,
sex happens even if there is no condom…but I
remove my penis when the ‘juice’ is about coming out. That is to say, ejaculate. (Male, FGD,
school 2)

7

J. Nkrumah et al.

8

Madam, with the menstrual cycle, sometimes the
blood flows for five, seven, and six days. (Female,
FGD, school 3)

Madam, From one to 28 days, you will not get pregnant when you engage in sexual intercourse, and from
five to 7 days, you can get pregnant if you engage in
sexual intercourse. (Female, FGD, school 2)

STIs and treatment
Adolescents showed fair knowledge of STIs by citing
relevant examples such as HIV, gonorrhea and syphilis,
and how they can be diagnosed. Others, however, had
very little knowledge about them. Among those who
knew STIs, symptoms of HIV were better known than
the other STIs they mentioned. Just like the responses
on contraception, a mix of sources of treatment for
STIs were named by the participants. While some
adolescents mentioned formal sources, others named
informal sources. Participants mentioned the following
examples.
Madam, an example of STI is moniasis. Another
one is Bilharzia…ehm, yes, and bacteria too.
(Female, FGD, school 1)
Madam, STI, it’s when one engages in sexual intercourse and gets illnesses like HIV, gonorrhea, or
syphilis. (Female, FGD, school 2)
Before being sure you have an STI, you must take a
test. For example, with HIV/AIDs, you will realize
you have grown lean and weak, so you will need to
see a doctor. (Female, FGD, school 3)

Preferred SRH topics
Participants expressed interest in learning more about
SRH and suggested topics such as abortion, abstinence,
contraception, decent dressing, the menstrual cycle,
personal friendship and reproduction. However, SRH
information was hard to reach or other times, non-­
existent. Participants expressed their interest and frustration in the following ways:
Madam, we need a book in easy-to-read writing or
picture forms. That book will be attractive and give
us a better understanding of the message. (Female,
FGD, school 3)
Because of the older people’s attitude towards
us on sex matters, we would be happy to have

SRH goals
Although some participants indicated they have sexual
partners, almost all mentioned abstinence as their SRH
goal. The chief reasons for abstinence were age, inability to cater to the baby and educational aspiration.
Here are some expressions from participants.
I will not have sex…I will go to bed doing nothing.
I will take a book and learn when the feeling to
have sex continues…because I want to be a pilot.
(Male, FGD, school 3)
Sir, abstinence…because we are too young to care
for ourselves and a mother. (Male, FGD, school 2)
Madam, abstinence from sex. (Female, FGD, school 3)

DISCUSSION
The study assesses how young adolescents in the Effutu
Municipality conceptualize SRH, their knowledge gaps
and barriers to information. Participants’ SRH literacy
challenges were identified in the domains of access to
safe, comprehensive and accurate information; readability and comprehension of the available information. We identified knowledge gaps in many domains,
including SRH as a concept, contraceptives, STIs and
risky sexual behaviors. Access to SRH information is
mainly informal and has the potential to propagate
inaccurate and unsafe information among adolescents.
Informal sources of information seem to be a characteristic feature of ASRH information in Ghana and
SSA, as the literature often refers to them as a major
source of SRH information for adolescents (Renzaho
et al., 2017; Ahinkorah et al., 2019; Obasi et al., 2019;
Gbagbo, 2020). The study participants complained
of limited access to information, particularly, SRH
educational materials. The only available structured
information was those found in the integrated science
textbook for 8th graders and the internet, which are
limited in scope and reach. This result corroborates
findings by Awusabo-Asare et al. (2017) that access
to structured learning materials is a major constraint
to the implementation of the comprehensive sex education policy in second-cycle and basic schools. Only
a few of the participants had access to smartphones
to search for SRH information on the internet. While
adult groups and relatives could have been viable and
reliable sources of SRH information for adolescents,
the depth of their SRH knowledge and their ability
to educate adolescents is not well known. This situation makes dependence on unstructured sources of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

Yes, madam, the 28 days is the safe period, and the
five to seven days is the unsafe period. (Female,
FGD, school 3)

easy-to-read booklets that we could use privately to
educate ourselves. (Female, FGD, school 2)

9

information unsafe for young adolescents. Improving
access to structured SRH information may drastically
enhance knowledge and positive health outcomes. It
is essential to lay the groundwork for young adolescents to approach sexual health more maturely and
responsibly.
Consistent with the literature on Ghana (Asampong
et al., 2013; Hall et al., 2018), prejudice against matters of adolescent sexuality and reproductive conversation was a significant barrier to SRH information and
knowledge. The participants expressed misgivings and
emphasized that they receive insults instead of proper
feedback when they ask questions related to sex and
reproduction. For most adolescents, the best cure to
prejudice would be to provide them with easy-to-read
SRH information to aid in independent reading and
avoid prejudgment. This aspect of the results highlights a critical gap in the existing policies on ASRH
in Ghana (Ghana Aids Commission, 2013; National
Population Council, 2016; GHS, 2016), as they propose no strategy for addressing sociocultural barriers
to SRH learning among adolescents. Advocacy and
reforms to remove sociocultural, linguistic and physical
access to safe SRH information are critical. Also, participants’ responses accentuated the existence of ASRH
stigma and the gendered nature of the stigma, which
corroborates findings from the literature. Studies in
Ghana show that Ghanaian adolescent females suffer
shame and humiliation arising from SRH stigmatization (Hall et al., 2018). For fear of stigmatization, most
adolescents cultivate a behavior of silence and secrecy
in matters of sex and reproduction. For instance, in the
Eastern and Volta Regions of Ghana, Asampong and
his colleagues (2013), reported the use of contention
to control teen sexual desires instead of an open and
honest parent–adolescent conversation on the timing
of sex. They found that most parents perceived the
present generation as ‘spoilt’ and one that lacks sexual morality. Prejudice and discrimination are likely to
predispose young adolescents to exploitation, coercion
or abusive relationships because they may be afraid of
what others will think of them if they ask for assistance
or talk about their experiences. Creating a welcoming
and inclusive atmosphere where young adolescents feel
empowered to make decisions about their SRH in an
informed and healthy fashion is critical.
Young adolescents’ conceptualization of SRH in this
study indicates poor awareness of SRH rights, safe sex
and contraceptive use. Their lack of awareness and
knowledge of essential domains of SRH reinforces
findings from Ghana and SSA. A study in eight sites
across SSA found that very few young in-school adolescents knew about menstruation and STIs (Finlay
et al., 2020). In Northern Ghana, Kyilleh et al. (2018)
reported the commonplace of premarital sex among

adolescents aged 10–19. While sexually active adolescents need access to safe information and education to
make informed and healthy choices, adolescents in the
study had poorer access to SRH information and had
lower knowledge of reproductive health choices. In the
present study, female in-school adolescents had very
little knowledge about the menstrual cycle, particularly
the safe and unsafe periods.
Given that some participants have sexual partners,
poor knowledge of the menstrual cycle and conceptive
are hot spots for adolescent pregnancy. The lack of
knowledge of essential SRH topics such as the menstrual cycle, risky sexual behaviors, STIs and contraceptives at the sub-national level seemingly suggests that
Ghana is far behind the target of the adolescent health
policy and strategy. As part of the policy targets, the
Ghana Health Service was to reach 90% of adolescents
with health information and improve the SRH knowledge of 90% of adolescents by 2020 (Ghana Health
Service, 2016). However, deeply entrenched social and
religious proscriptions limit ASRH discussions to the
so-called ‘safe’ issues such as abstinence, signs of sexual
maturation and personal hygiene with the view to preventing adolescents from engaging in sexual activities.
Findings from Uganda suggest that most adults believe
that sexual desires and sexual relationships among
adolescents are the result of sex education (Muhwezi
et al., 2015). While studies on religious faith and ASRH
acceptance are scarce, Manlove et al. (2008) have
found a negative association between family religiosity
and the age of sexual debut among female adolescents.
This finding, albeit dated, suggests that certain family
principles and values do promote abstinence and may
be useful in improving ASRH outcomes. Yet, a comprehensive approach to improving ASRH outcomes
cannot be overemphasized. While we do not intend to
water down the value of age-­appropriate ASRH education, sexual desire is physiological. Therefore, applying a discriminatory approach to the content of SRH
learning would rather deny the young adolescent the
essential knowledge and social skills necessary to make
informed health choices and to navigate the allures of
adolescent life.
The majority of the female participants had misconceptions about risky sexual behaviors. Rather, they
knew so much about self-induced abortion. The poor
knowledge of essential topics in SRH coupled with
the active sexual behavior reported by some participants, beckon to us the looming danger of increased
teen pregnancy, recurrent pregnancy and self-induced
abortion among young adolescents in the municipality. The active sexual behavior of some of the participants is corroborated by anecdotal accounts of some
school heads. They mentioned that some adolescents
indulge in sexual activities as early as grade 5. A

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

Adolescent sexual and reproductive health literacy needs

J. Nkrumah et al.

10

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

LIMITATIONS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The study is limited to in-school adolescents in the
Effutu Municipality in the Central Region of Ghana.
Although prejudice and stigma against ASRH emerged
in the participants’ lived experiences, the authors did
not set out to investigate ASRH stigma and prejudice.
Therefore, caution is needed in order not to interpret
the result as such.

CONCLUSION
This study provides an extensive description of young
adolescents’ conceptualization of SRH, information
access challenges and knowledge gaps. Even though
total abstinence was a universal SRH goal for the young
adolescents in the study, some were sexually active.
Almost all the participants had restricted and poor
access to structured and safe sources of SRH information, except a few who had internet access. Major
challenges to SRH information access were the lack of
availability of information, the linguistic difficulty of
available text and ASRH prejudice. Young adolescents
are uninformed about SRH as a concept, risky sexual
behaviors, STIs and contraceptives. The results of the
study call to mind factors at sub-national levels that
need to be improved to foster a favorable environment
for ASRH education and literacy to thrive. Advocacy
on community and parental involvement, adolescent
SRH education and literacy at the sub-national level
are essential to stem the tide of prejudice and stigma
and to stimulate an open parent–adolescent SRH conversation. It will be useful to revise the AHPS’s strategies to embrace actions to improve the availability of
easy-to-read SRH educational materials and adolescent health literacy. Revamping existing strategies such
as the creation of adolescent corners and peer education in schools within Effutu and other municipalities
in the Central Region will improve adolescents’ SRH
knowledge and outcomes.

Supplementary material is available
Promotion International online.

at

Health

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
JN: Contributed to conceptualization, methodology,
investigation, analysis and drafting of manuscript.
AAA: contributed to conceptualization, validation and
supervision. AAAB: contributed to validation, drafting
and review of the manuscript. LY: contributed to conceptualization and supervision. GA: conceptualization
and supervision. CRT: contributed to investigation.

We acknowledge the support of the Municipal Director
of Education, the Heads of participating schools and
the participants’ parents, all of Effutu Municipality. We
would also like to acknowledge Dr Beth Offei Awuku
of the University of Education, Winneba for her meaningful contributions to the work.

DATA AVAILABILITY
Future users, agencies and researchers (within and outside Ghana) will be required to contact the authors to
discuss the use of the data. The research data will be
made available on request based on evidence of ethical
clearance from a recognized ethics review committee.
All data requests should be sent to the corresponding
author (Jacqueline Nkrumah: jnkrumah@uew.edu.gh).

FUNDING
The work was funded through the personal financial
resources of the authors.

REFERENCES
Afriyie, J. and Essilfie, M. E. (2019) Association between risky
sexual behaviour and HIV risk perception among in-school
adolescents in a municipality in Ghana. Ghana Medical
Journal, 53, 29–36.
Ahinkorah, B. O., Hagan Jr, J. E., Seidu, A. A., Budu, E.,
Hormenu, T., Mintah, J. K. et al. (2019) Access to adolescent
pregnancy prevention information and services in Ghana:
a community-based case-control study. Frontiers in Public
Health, 7, 382, 1–11, doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2019.00382
Asampong, E., Osafo, J., Bingenheimer, J. B. and Ahiadeke, C.
(2013) Adolescents and parents’ perceptions of best time
for sex and sexual communications from two communities
in the Eastern and Volta Regions of Ghana: implications for
HIV and AIDS education. BMC International Health and
Human Rights, 13, 1–11.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

study of basic school adolescents in the municipality of Komenda–Edina–Egyafo–Abirem in the Central
Region validates our findings. In this municipality,
approximately 52% of the study participants had
sexual debuts below age 14, and 27% were sexually
active (Afriyie and Essilfie, 2019). The prevalence of
sexual activities among adolescents, coupled with
poor SRH knowledge, underscores the urgency for
a combination of educational and behavioral interventions such as comprehensive sexuality education
and literacy, peer education, parental involvement
and health services tailored to the specific needs of
adolescents.

11

Awusabo-Asare, K., Stillman, M., Keogh, S., Doku, D. T., KumiKyereme, A., Esia- Donkoh, K., ... & Bankole, A. (2017).
From paper to practice: Sexuality education policies and
their implementation in Ghana. Guttmacher Institute.
Bennett, I. M., Frasso, R., Bellamy, S. L., Wortham, S. and Gross,
K. S. (2013) Pre-teen literacy and subsequent teenage childbearing in the US population. Contraception, 87, 459–464.
Bryman, A. (2016) Social Research Methods. Oxford, United
Kingdom, University Press .
Butina, M. (2015) A narrative approach to qualitative inquiry.
American Society for Clinical Laboratory Science, 28,
190–196.
City News Room. (2021) Teenage pregnancies in Ghana hit
555,575 in five years. ​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​​https://citinewsroom.com/2021/06/
teenage-pregnancies-in-ghana-hit-555575-in-five-years/
(last accessed 5 April 2022).
Denno, D. M., Hoopes, A. J. and Chandra-Mouli, V. (2015)
Effective strategies to provide adolescent sexual and reproductive health services and to increase demand and community support. The Journal of Adolescent Health, 56,
S22–S41.
Dongarwar, D. and Salihu, H. M. (2019) Influence of sexual and
reproductive health literacy on single and recurrent adolescent pregnancy in Latin America. Journal of Pediatric and
Adolescent Gynecology, 32, 506–513.
Fereday, J. and Muir-Cochrane, E. (2006) Demonstrating rigor
using thematic analysis: a hybrid approach of inductive and
deductive coding and theme development. International
Journal of Qualitative Methods, 5, 80–92.
Finlay, J. E., Assefa, N., Mwanyika‐Sando, M., Dessie, Y.,
Harling, G., Njau, T. et al. (2020) Sexual and reproductive
health knowledge among adolescents in eight sites across
sub‐Saharan Africa. Tropical Medicine & International
Health, 25, 44–53.
Furry, D. B., Mashalla, Y. and Tshweneagae, G. T. (2019) Sexual
and reproductive health among high school adolescents in
west Shoa zone, Oromia region in Ethiopia. African Journal
of Reproductive Health, 23, 65–72.
Gbagbo, F. Y. (2020) Contraceptive use among basic school pupils
in Ghana: a case study of a municipality. International Journal
of Pediatrics, 2020, 7521096, doi: 10.1155/2020/7521096
Ghana AIDS Commission. (2013) National HIV and AIDS,
STI Policy, Accra: Ghana AIDS Commission. https://www.
healthpolicyproject.com/pubs/153_Policyfinal.pdf​​​​​​​​​​​​​​
(last
accessed 19 May 2021).
Ghana Health Service. (2016) Adolescent Health Service Policy and
Strategy (2016–2020). Ghana Health Service. https://www.
afro.who.int/sites/default/files/2017-10/ADOLESCENT%20
HEALTH%20SERVICE%20POLICY%20%20AND%20
STRATEGY.pdf (last accessed 10 July 2023).
Ghana Web. (2021) 13 teenage pregnancies recorded every
one hour, 110,000 recorded in 2020—GHS statistics.
ghanaweb.com (last accessed 5 April 2022).
Ghebreyohans, G., Khalil, E. A. G., Tsige, Z. and Ali, F.
(2015) Burden of reproductive health illiteracy in Eritrea.
International Journal of Sciences: Basic and Applied
Research, 19, 285–297.
Hall, K. S., Morhe, E., Manu, A., Harris, L. H., Ela, E., Loll, D.
et al. (2018) Factors associated with sexual and reproductive health stigma among adolescent girls in Ghana. PLoS
One, 13, e0195163.

Ivanova, O., Rai, M., Mlahagwa, W., Tumuhairwe, J., Bakuli,
A., Nyakato, V. N. et al. (2019) A cross-sectional mixed-­
methods study of sexual and reproductive health knowledge, experiences and access to services among refugee
adolescent girls in the Nakivale refugee settlement, Uganda.
Reproductive Health, 16, 1–11.
Jones, S. and Norton, B. (2007) On the limits of sexual health
literacy: insights from Ugandan schoolgirls. Diaspora,
Indigenous, and Minority Education, 1, 285–305.
Kim, T. Y., Haider, M., Hancock, G. R. and Boudreaux,
M. H. (2019) The role of health literacy in family planning use among Senegalese women. Journal of Health
Communication, 24, 244–261.
Kyilleh, J. M., Tabong, P. T. N. and Konlaan, B. B. (2018)
Adolescents’ reproductive health knowledge, choices and
factors affecting reproductive health choices: a qualitative study in the West Gonja District in Northern region,
Ghana. BMC International Health and Human Rights,
18, 1–12.
Manlove, J., Logan, C., Moore, K. A. and Ikramullah, E. (2008)
Pathways from family religiosity to adolescent sexual
activity and contraceptive use. Perspectives on Sexual and
Reproductive Health, 40, 105–117.
Manortey, S. and Geh, E. K. (2018) Access to sexual and reproductive health information among female adolescents in selected
senior high schools in the lower Manya Krobo Municipality,
Ghana. Applied Science and Innovative Research, 2, 180.
Melesse, D. Y., Mutua, M. K., Choudhury, A., Wado, Y. D., Faye,
C. M., Neal, S. et al. (2020) Adolescent sexual and reproductive health in sub-Saharan Africa: who is left behind?
BMJ Global Health, 5, e002231.
Morris, J. L. and Rushwan, H. (2015) Adolescent sexual and
reproductive health: the global challenges. International
Journal of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 131, S40–S42.
Muhwezi, W. W., Katahoire, A. R., Banura, C., Mugooda, H.,
Kwesiga, D., Bastien, S. et al. (2015) Perceptions and experiences of adolescents, parents and school administrators
regarding adolescent-parent communication on sexual
and reproductive health issues in urban and rural Uganda.
Reproductive Health, 12, 1–16.
National Population Council. (2016) Adolescent Reproductive
Health Policy. National Population Council, Accra,
Ghana.
Nyarko, C. C., Unson, C., Nyarko, P. K. and Koduah, M. (2014)
Chlamydia trachomatis prevalence in Ghana. A study at a
municipal district in Western Ghana. International Journal
of Scientific & Technology Research, 3, 163–169.
Obasi, M., Manortey, S., Kyei, K. A., Addo, M. K., Talboys,
S., Gay, L. et al. (2019) Sexual and reproductive health of
adolescents in schools for people with disabilities. The Pan
African Medical Journal, 33, 299.
Osei-Yeboah, J., Lokpo, S. Y., Ussher, F. A., Orish, V. N., Hamid,
A. W. M., Dakorah, M. P. et al. (2018) The epidemiology of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and syphilis in Ghana:
a five-year single urban site parallel population-based
analysis vis-à-vis the sentinel survey. Journal of Tropical
Medicine, 2018, 6574731, doi:10.1155/2018/6574731
Rabiee, F. (2004) Focus-group interview and data analysis. The
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society, 63, 655–660.
Renzaho, A. M., Kamara, J. K., Georgeou, N. and Kamanga,
G. (2017) Sexual, reproductive health needs, and rights

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

Adolescent sexual and reproductive health literacy needs

12

UNFPA. (2014) Investing in Sexual and Reproductive Health in
Sub-Saharan Africa. New York, Guttmacher Institute. https://
www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/resource-pdf/383%20
AIU3%20Regional_SSA_ENG%2011.19.14%20FINAL_0.
pdf (last accessed 12 October 2023).
UNFPA. (2022) Adolescent Pregnancy in Ghanaian
Communities—A worrying trend amid MTCT of HIV.
https://ghana.unfpa.org/en/news/adolescent-pregnancy-gha
naian-communities-%E2%80%93-worrying-trend-amidmtct-hiv-0 (last accessed 15 October 2023).
UNICEF. (2022) The situation of adolescents in Ghana. https://
www.unicef.org/ghana/media/4101/file/Situation%20
Analysis%20-%20Adolescent%20Girls%20in%20Ghana.
pdf (date last accessed 15 October 2023).
Von Seggern, M. and Young, N. J. (2003) The focus group
method in libraries: issues relating to process and data analysis. Reference Services Review, 31, 272–284.
WHO. (2013, December 10) Definition of key terms. World
Health Organization. https://www.who.int/publications/i/
item/9789241505727 (date last accessed 12 March 2021).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/heapro/article/39/3/daae065/7696825 by University of Ghana. Balme Library user on 25 March 2026

of young people in slum areas of Kampala, Uganda: a
cross-sectional study. PLoS One, 12, e0169721.
Santos, M. J., Ferreira, E. and Ferreira, M. (2019) O6 sexual and
reproductive health literacy in college students. European
Journal of Public Health, 29, ckz098.
Stahl, N. A. and King, J. R. (2020) Expanding approaches for
research: understanding and using trustworthiness in qualitative research. Journal of Developmental Education, 44, 26–28.
Sully, E. A., Biddlecom, A., Darroch, J. E., Riley, T., Ashford, L.
S., Lince-Deroche, N. et al. (2020) Adding it up: Investing
in Sexual and Reproductive Health 2019. https://www.
guttmacher.org/report/adding-it-up-investing-in-sexual-reproductive-health-2019 (last accessed 17 November 2023).
Tenkorang, E. Y., Amo-Adjei, J. and Kumi-Kyereme, A. (2021)
Assessing components of Ghana’s comprehensive sexuality
education on the timing of sexual debut among in-school
youth. Youth & Society, 53, 1259–1286.
Trauma and Specialist Hospital. (2021) Mid-Year Report.
Trauma and Specialist Hospital, Effutu Municipal, Central
Region, Ghana.

J. Nkrumah et al.

