http://ijhpm.com
Int J Health Policy Manag 2016, 5(9), 525–533
http://ijhpm.com
http://ijhpm.com
Int
Int JJ Health
Health Policy
Policy Manag
Manag 2016,
2016, 5(2),
5(2), 117–119
117–119

doi 10.15171/ijhpm.2016.42

Original Article
doi
10.15171/ijhpm.2015.188
doi 10.15171/ijhpm.2015.188

Commentary

Operationalization of the Ghanaian Patients’ Charter in a
Politics Public
and Power
in Global
Health:
The Constituting
Role
Peri-urban
Hospital:
Voices
of Healthcare
Workers
of Conflicts
and Patients
Comment
onBuabeng,
“Navigating
Stealth
Advocacy
and Unconscious Dogmatism: The
*
Lily Yarney
, Thomas
DianaBetween
Baidoo, Justice
Nyigmah
Bawole
Challenge of Researching the Norms, Politics and Power of Global Health”

Abstract
Article History:
Clemet Askheim, Kristin Heggen, Eivind Engebretsen**
Background: Health is a basic human right necessary for the exercise of other human rights. Every human being
Received: 14 September 2015
is, therefore, entitled to the highest possible standard of health necessary to living a life of dignity. Establishment
Accepted: 16 April 2016
of patients’
Charter is a step towards protecting the rights and responsibilities of patients, but violation of patients’ ArticleePublished:
Abstract
Article History:
History: 23 April 2016
rights is common
in article,
healthcare
institutions,
in thetodeveloping
world.
This study which
conducted
In a recent
Gorik
Ooms has especially
drawn attention
the normative
underpinnings
of the was
politics
of
Received:
Received: 55 September
September 2015
2015
between May
andWe
May
2014,
operationalization
Ghana’s
PatientsofCharter
peri-urban Accepted:
global2013
health.
claim
thatassessed
Ooms is the
indirectly
submitting to aofliberal
conception
politics in
by aframing
Accepted: 13
13 October
October 2015
2015
ePublished:
the politics of global health as a question of individual morality. Drawing on the theoretical works of
public hospital.
ePublished: 15
15 October
October 2015
2015
Mouffe,
introducemethods
a conflictual
concept
of collect
the political
an alternative
to Ooms’
conception.
Methods:Chantal
Qualitative
datawecollection
were
used to
data as
from
25 healthcare
workers
and patients
controversies
surrounding
medical
treatment
of AIDSmanually,
patients inusing
developing
countriesofassystematic
a case we text
who wereUsing
purposively
selected.
The interview
data
were analyzed
the principles
underline the opportunity for political changes, through political articulation of an issue, and collective
condensation.
mobilization
on that
suchthe
an healthcare
articulation.staff of the Polyclinic are aware of the existence of the patients’
View
View Video
Video Summary
Summary
Results: The
findings based
indicate
Keywords:
Global
Liberal Politics,
Conflict,
Antiretroviral
(ARV)of the
Charter and
also know
someHealth,
of its contents.
PatientsChantal
have noMouffe,
knowledge
of the AIDS,
existence
or the contents
Treatment
Charter. Availability of the Charter, community sensitization, monitoring and orientation of staff are factors that
Copyright: © 2016 by Kerman University of Medical Sciences
promote the operationalization of the Charter, while institutional implementation procedures such as lack of
Citation: Askheim C, Heggen K, Engebretsen E. Politics and power in global health: the constituting role of
complaint procedures and low knowledge among patients militate against operationalization of the Charter.
conflicts: Comment on “Navigating between stealth advocacy and unconscious dogmatism: the challenge
*Correspondence to:
to:
Conclusion:
Public health
facilities
should
theirhealth.
patients
well-informed
about
their rights and *Correspondence
of researching
the norms,
politics
andensure
power that
of global
” Intare
J Health
Policy Manag.
2016;5(2):117–
Eivind
Eivind Engebretsen
Engebretsen
responsibilities
to
facilitate
effective
implementation
of
the
Charter.
Also,
patients’
rights
and
responsibilities
can
119. doi:10.15171/ijhpm.2015.188
Email: eivind.engebretsen@medisin.uio.no
be dramatized and broadcasted on television and radio in major Ghanaian languages to enhance awareness of Email: eivind.engebretsen@medisin.uio.no
Ghanaians on the Charter.
Keywords: Patients’ Charter, Operationalization, Peri-urban, Public Hospitals, Ghana
take the political as the primary level and the normative as
n a recent contribution to the ongoing debate about the
Copyright: © 2016 by Kerman University of Medical Sciences
or derived
from
role of
Gorik
emphasizesof the secondary,
Citation: Yarney
L, power
BuabenginT,global
Baidoohealth,
D, Bawole
JN. Ooms
Operationalization
Ghanaian patients’
charter
in athe political?
*Correspondence
to:
That
is
what
we
will
try
by introducing
an
the
normative
underpinnings
of
global
health
politics.
peri-urban public hospital: voices of healthcare workers and patients. Int J Health Policy Manag. 2016;5(9):525–to do here,
Lily
Yarney and hence free
alternative
conceptualization
of
the
political
He
identifies
three
related
problems:
(1)
a
lack
of
agreement
533. doi:10.15171/ijhpm.2016.42

I

Email: babyaraba95@yahoo.com
among global health scholars about their normative premises,
us from the “false dilemma” Ooms
also wants to escape.
“Although constructivists have emphasized how underlying
(2) a lack of agreement between global health scholars and
normative structures constitute actors’ identities and
policy-makers regarding the normative premises underlying
Key Messages
interests, they have rarely treated these normative structures
policy, and (3) a lack of willingness among scholars to
themselves as defined and infused by power, or emphasized
clearly state their normative premises and assumptions. This
Implications for policy makers
how constitutive effects also are expressions of power.”22 This
confusion is for Ooms one of the explanations “why global
•
The study found that operationalization of the Ghanaian Patients’ Charter is almost non-existent in the peri-urban public facility studied.
is the starting
for the
political
Chantal
health’s
policy-makers
are (GHS)
not implementing
knowledge
•
While
the Ghana
Health Service
is focusing on the
improving
access to healthcare,
there ispoint
the need
to also
ensuretheorist
that patients
who Mouffe,
use the
andforher
response istotoinclude
develop
an ontological
generated
by global
health’sin empirical
scholars.
” He
calls
services
of the facilities
are treated
a humane manner.
Thus,
there
is the need
policy-makers
in policy
guidelines, conception
the necessaryof
political,
“the political
belongs
to ourthat
ontological
forforgreater
unity between
scholarsrights
andand
between
scholarsas well the
steps
public awareness
of their patients’
responsibilities,
as the
necessarywhere
implementation
structures
to ensure
patients
33
According
to
Mouffe,
society
is
instituted
condition.
”
and
policy-makers,
concerning
the
underlying
normative
are aware of their rights and responsibilities.
11
through
conflict. “[B]y
political’
mean
theofdimension
premises
and
openness
when
comes to
•
Sanctions
must
alsogreater
be clearly
spelled out
anditenforced
foradvocacy.
health providers
in these institutions
who ‘the
go contrary
to Ithe
tenets
the Charter,of
commend
the effort
to reinstate
poweris violated
and politics
in enforcement.
antagonism
which
I take
to from
be constitutive
andWe
infringe
on the rights
of patients
if the Charter
without
This will
deter
others
doing same.of human societies,
•
Theglobal
research
alsoand
informs
onempirical
their shortcomings
and encourages
existing
practices
that are
geared
the improvement
of
health
agreemanagement
that “a purely
evidence-based
while
by ‘politics’
I mean
the
set oftoward
practices
and institutions
patients’
rightsisand
responsibilities
enforcement
by integrating
the operationalization
the patients’
planning
of the institution’s
approach
a fiction,
” and that
such a view
risks covering
up
throughofwhich
an Charter
order isin the
created,
organizing
human
activities.
“the role of politics and power.” But by contrasting this fiction
coexistence in the context of conflictuality provided by the
•
Thewith
operationalization
the patients’
Charter
must be
holistic and
responsibility
of all”33possible
stakeholders
and not
health workers
and
An issue
or a topic needs
toonly
be contested
to become
global health of
research
“driven
by crises,
hota issues,
political.
patients.
political, and such a contestation concerns public action and
the concerns of organized interest groups,” as a “path we are
creates a ‘we’ and ‘they’ form of collective identification. But
tryingfortothe
move
away from,” Ooms is submitting to a liberal
Implications
public
the fixation
of social
relations of
is making
partial and
precarious,
since
conception
of
politics
he
implicitly
criticizes
the
outcomes
The research creates sensitization on the existence of the Ghanaian Patients’ Charter,
and stresses
the importance
the content
as well
as
evades
the constituting
of public.
antagonism
is rights
an ever
present
possibility.
To politicize
an issue
of.11 A liberal
the enforcement
of the view
tenetsof
of politics
the Charter
available
to the generalrole
Ghanaian
Thus, the
and
responsibilities
of the
public in relation
and reduces
it to either
rationalistic,
economic
and be
able to
mobilize
needs
represent
the
to healthconflicts
and healthcare
will be heightened.
Thea study
contributes
to improved service
delivery
to the
generalsupport,
public in one
the way
andtomanner
ethical
issues arecalculation,
handled among
patients
and healthcare
or an
individual
questionproviders.
of moral norms. This
world in a conflictual manner “with opposed camps with
is echoed in Ooms when he states that “it is not possible to
which people can identify.”33
Ooms uses the case of “increasing international aid spending
discuss the politics of global health without discussing the
11
11
But
what
if
we
onnation
AIDS is
treatment”
to of
illustrate
his point.
normative
premises
behind
the
politics.
”
Background
every
the wealth
its citizens.
Thus,He
theframes
healththe
of

Provision of quality healthcare is very crucial in all countries.
adults of a nation partially determines its economic strength
1
Institute
Health
of
Oslo,
Norway
This is because
governments
haveFaculty
realized
that theUniversity
health ofof
The economic benefits of quality healthcare
Institute of
of
Health and
and Society,
Society,
Faculty
of Medicine,
Medicine,
University
of Oslo,
Oslo, and
Oslo,well-being.
Norway
Department of Public Administration and Health Services Management, Business School, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.

Yarney et al

to individual citizens and the nation at large cannot be
over-emphasized. Studies have established that provision of
effective healthcare has a direct correlation to the economic
worth of a nation.2,3 Recognizing this, the World Health
Organization (WHO) has established that healthcare is a
fundamental human right.4 Thus, the enjoyment of the highest
attainable standard of health is one of the fundamental rights
of every human being without distinction of race, religion,
and political belief, economic or social condition. It is evident
in Article 25 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights
that everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for
the health and well-being of himself and his family, including
medical care and necessary social services, and the right to
security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability,
widowhood, old age, etc.5
Patient Charters are guidelines that target the relationship
between health professionals and users of health services,
providing information on standards of care that patients
can expect to receive and demand as a basic human right.6
Discussions in the literature reviewed are developed within
a human rights context. Developed countries such as New
Zealand, the United Kingdom, Australia, the United States,
and Norway have seen the introduction of patient bills
of rights and responsibilities or patient Charters. These
documents recognized patients’ rights, defined healthcare
objectives, and emphasized the complementary nature of
rights and responsibilities between patients and healthcare
providers. In some of these nations, patients’ rights have the
force of law; in others, they are statements of health policy.
Regardless of the form they take, these initiatives have two
goals: to empower patients by providing them with certain
rights and entitlements as they interact with healthcare
providers and institutions; and to place the patient-healthcare
provider relationship on a more equal footing. By outlining
what is expected of healthcare providers, institutions and
patients, they serve as important guidelines for the delivery of
healthcare services.7
In the United States for instance, a report revealed that
the effectiveness of the patient Charter was largely due to
state legislation that oversees the process.8 This indicates a
limitation of patient Charter operationalization in countries
whose patient Charters are not legislated, including Ghana.
An overview of different patient bills of rights has affirmed
that the potential of patient Charters to strengthen the
position of the patient in the patient–healthcare provider
relationship.7 However, therein lies a significant limitation of
patient Charters. Patient rights and Charters only deal with
the aspect of health in relation to healthcare services and
do not necessarily address the broader, complex underlying
determinants of health.
In Africa and the developing world, legislative instruments
that are meant to promote patients’ rights exist. Some of
these are South African Patients’ Rights Charter,9 launched
in 1997, and the Ministry of Health’s Service Charter in
Nigeria.10 In a comparative analysis of patients’ rights across
five countries, it has been explained that irrespective of the
comprehensiveness of a country’s statement of rights, patients’
awareness and familiarity with the rights are crucial to quality
in and effectiveness of the healthcare system.11 Patients need
to know their rights and responsibilities to ensure that they
526

take actions and ask questions relevant to their care and
delivery. However, it has been found in another study that half
of the patients who participated had never heard of patients’
rights.12 This finding indicates how the healthcare system has
neglected such an important justice issue. It was discovered
in the same study that no single poster on patients’ rights was
available on the walls of the unit and no lessons were given to
patients concerning their rights. Also, a study that interviewed
128 patients in a large hospital in Turkey using questionnaires
that included items on patients’ rights, reported that 23%
of the patients were aware of patients’ rights. In addition,
38% of the patients did not know their own diagnosis, and
63% of those undergoing surgery did not know the reason
for their operation. The researchers concluded that the two
factors which contributed to these findings were the patients’
low socio-economic status and the low educational level of
the women participants (about half of those taking part in
this study). The authors noted that, although the nurses in
the hospital where this research took place were aware of the
Turkish Patients’ Rights Regulations, they believed they could
not influence the system to achieve implementation of those
rights.13
Establishing patients’ rights is a step towards protecting
patients’ rights, but violation of patients’ rights is common in
healthcare institutions, and this is attributed to systemic and
institutional obstacles, such as insufficient healthcare staff
and inadequate acquisition and maintenance of technological
equipment.14 Meeting patients’ needs must be the core
concept for the meaning of patients’ rights, however, lack of
knowledge about rights, lack of standard of practice among
hospitals and the impact of service pressure and subsequent
lack of holistic care, are some of the factors known to inhibit
the implementation of patients’ rights.15
Article 30 of the 1992 Republican Constitution of Ghana
stipulates that no individual who by reason of illness or any
other cause is unable to give consent shall be deprived by any
other person of medical treatment, education or any other
social or economic benefit. Thus, the increasing awareness of
the government on the need to ensure quality healthcare by
becoming more committed to the provision of effective and
reliable healthcare for its citizens resulted in the enactment
of the patient’s Charter.16 This Charter highlights the patients’
rights and responsibilities in the care process irrespective of
age, gender, ethnic background and religion. Health facilities
must provide for and respect the rights and responsibilities
of patients or clients, families, health workers and other
healthcare providers. The patients’ Charter is expected to
ensure that the dignity of patients, irrespective of their sociocultural and religious affiliation, among other differences
must be held paramount and has been in existence since 2002.
Ten years after the Ghana Health Service (GHS) established
the patients’ Charter as a tool to ensure that patients’
rights and dignity are protected and upheld, the GHS in its
report on clinical care quality assurance conference in 2012
highlighted some key challenges confronting the service in
the implementation of the tenets of the Charter. These include
patient safety, poor staff attitude and long client waiting
time. The meeting, thus, agreed to sustain dissemination
of the patients’ Charter and the GHS Code of Conduct and
Disciplinary Procedures to ensure quality of service. The

International Journal of Health Policy and Management, 2016, 5(9), 525–533

Yarney et al

report recommended that conscious efforts be made to arrest
the root cause of conduct that can compromise the provisions
in the Ghanaian Patients’ Charter.17 By these assertions, one
may suggest that behaviors that compromise the provisions
of the Charter still existed ten years after its inception.
Further, a study on the patients’ Charter conducted in four
health facilities in Accra, the capital city of the country, on
the implementation of the patients’ Charter, indicated that
a significant number of patients complained of impolite
treatment from a cross-section of hospital staff. The majority
of patients studied reported that their consent were not
sought before drugs were given to them, males were less likely
to be consulted than females, the majority of patients and a
significant number of providers were ignorant of the existence
and contents of the Charter, and providers had generally not
been able to carry out their obligations under the Charter as
expected.18
Additionally, a baseline study undertaken by the Royal Health
Organization (ROHEO) in partnership with other non-profit
organizations established that the patients’ Charter, remains
largely unheeded to in the discharge of health services.
According to this report, an overall assessment showed that
338 of 376 respondents constituting 90% of respondents
had low knowledge about the patients’ Charter. The limited
studies on the patient Charter have focused on the knowledge
and implementation of the patients’ Charter in the Greater
Accra and Volta regions of the country using quantitative
methods.18,19 While the GHS is focusing on improving access
to healthcare, there is the need to ensure that patients who
use the services and facilities are treated in a humane manner.
The Ghanaian patients’ Charter like all similar documents
around the world as published by the GHS is meant to protect
the rights of the patient. It addresses the right of the Ghanaian
to an easily accessible, equitable and comprehensive healthcare
of the highest quality within the available resources of the
country, respect for the patient as an individual who has a
right of choice in his or her healthcare plan decisions, the right
to be protected from discrimination stemming from culture,
ethnicity, language, religion, gender, age and type of disability
or illness, the role and responsibility of the client or patient
for personal and communal health via promotive, preventive,
and basic curative strategies. The GHS has also indicated in
its introductory statement to the patients’ Charter that the
service institutions require collaboration between health
workers, patients and clients, as well as society to implement
the tenets of the Charter. Hence, optimal healthcare depends
on team work among all relevant stakeholders. Again the GHS
calls on healthcare institutions to adopt the patients’ Charter
to ensure that service personnel as well as patients, clients and
their families understand their rights and responsibilities.
Although the operationalization of the patients’ Charter
seems to be very difficult as depicted by relevant literature,
information and opportunities to learn about issues such as
the definition and reinforcement of patients’ rights should
be available to everyone, not just healthcare professionals
or patients. We employed qualitative methods to study the
experiences of patients and health workers on the Ghanaian
patients’ Charter by specifically assessing their awareness,
knowledge and experiences on the patients’ Charter, as well
as the factors that influence the operationalization of the

Charter in a peri-urban public hospital in Ghana.
Methods
Study Design
A case study design was employed to study the experiences
of patients and health workers on the Ghanaian Patients’
Charter by specifically assessing their awareness, knowledge,
and experiences on the Charter as well as the factors that
influence the operationalization of the Charter in a periurban public facility. The case study design was used because
it offers a holistic form of inquiry20,21 and has wide application
especially in nursing research. Thus, it is seen as appropriate
since the researchers are interested in a particular setting
and how the rights and responsibilities of patients are being
operationalized. This design offered the opportunity to do
an in-depth assessment and analysis of each of the objectives
for the study with a view not to generalize the findings of
the study, but to portray what specifically pertains to Kasoa
Polyclinic, Central Region, Ghana (a peri-urban public health
hospital) in regard to the implementation of the Ghanaian
Patients’ Charter.
The structure of Ghana’s health system follows a top down
approach with the Ministry of Health (MoH) as the top
body responsible for setting the health sector’s broad policy
objectives, and coordinating and regulating activities of the
numerous healthcare agencies in the country, including the
GHS, which is a public service body established under Act
525 of 1996 as required by the 1992 constitution of Ghana as
the public sector implementation body of health activities and
programs. The GHS has organized health administration into
three levels: national, regional, and district, which are further
divided into five functional levels: national, regional, district,
sub-district, and community levels. Healthcare delivery is
structured in three parts: primary, secondary, and tertiary.
The study was conducted at the Kasoa Polyclinic (a subdistrict public facility) in the Awutu Senya East Municipal
Assembly of the central region and provides both primary and
limited secondary health services to its catchment populace.
The Polyclinic is one of the three Government health facilities
in the Municipality. It was established in 1983 as a health
centre until December 2012 when it was elevated to the status
of a Polyclinic. There are six main units in the polyclinic. They
are the Reproductive and Child Health Unit, Disease Control
Unit, Laboratory Unit, Maternity Unit, Children’s Unit as well
as the general Outpatients’ Department. As a GHS institution,
the Kasoa Polyclinic is expected to adopt the patient’s Charter
to ensure that service personnel as well as patients or clients
and their families understand their rights and responsibilities.
Nurse to patient ratio, and doctor to patient ratio at the Kasoa
Polyclinic as at 2012 were 1:464, and 1:25039, respectively.
The Kasoa Polyclinic was selected purposively for the study
because it is a peri-urban public health facility, and no research
on the patients’ Charter has been conducted in the facility.
Study Population, Sampling and Sample Size
The population for the study comprised all staff and patients
of the Kasoa Polyclinic in the Awutu-Senya Municipal
Assembly of the central region of Ghana. Purposive sampling
was used to select 25 persons who were willing to participate
in the study. They consisted of 5 frontline health workers

International Journal of Health Policy and Management, 2016, 5(9), 525–533

527

Yarney et al

who had worked for more than 2 years in the Polyclinic and
are knowledgeable on the operations of the facility. Those
volunteers were four staff nurses and the Administrator of
the Polyclinic (who was included because he is supposed to
make the necessary arrangement for policy implementation),
and 20 patients, 10 from the maternity ward and 10 from the
outpatients unit. The out patients and the maternity units
of the Polyclinic were purposively selected with the support
of the Administrator of the facility. The selected units were
better placed to have respondents who are adult patients 18
years and older, have visited the facility at least once before
their current visit, and would be able to engage in interviews.
Data Collection Method, Instrument, and Process
The study employed a qualitative research approach.
This approach guides the researcher in the planning and
implementation in such a way that it is most likely to achieve
the intended goals.22 This research approach allowed for
a deeper understanding about the operationalization of
the patients’ Charter in the Kasoa Polyclinic, and of the
experiences of patients and health management regarding
the operationalization of the patients’ Charter. In-depth
interviews using in-depth interview guide were used in
gathering data from the participants. Each interview was
recorded with an MP3 Recorder. Informal observation on
information for patients in the form of posters and writing
of field notes as well as other secondary data from print
media, journal articles and annual reports were used to obtain
additional information for the study.
During the data collection process, the selected units in the
clinic were visited on regular basis. On each occasion, the
Administrator supported identifying appropriate in-patient
respondents who met the selection criteria for the study.
Interviews were conducted in either English language or the
local Guan or Twi language as per the choice of participants.
Data Analysis
The audio recordings were transcribed, and together with
field notes, analyzed manually. Themes and subthemes were
generated from the data with the objectives of the study as
a guide. Qualitative research requires a methodological
soundness and adequacy, therefore, Guba’s Model of
Trustworthiness as described by Lincoln and Guba23
was used to ensure this. The strategies that were used to
ensure trustworthiness were credibility and confirmability.
Credibility requires sufficient submersion of the researcher
in the research setting to enable the recurrent patterns to
be identified and verified. This was addressed by listening
to the audio recordings repeatedly after which a verbatim
transcription of the recordings were made. The transcripts
were typed in English and read many times during analysis.
The strategy of confirmability guarantees that the findings,
conclusions and recommendations are supported by the
data and that there is congruence in the interpretation and
the actual evidence.24,25 This was achieved by maintaining
objectivity throughout the research process. The actual
evidence includes the transcribed interviews, field notes,
and participation with the respondents. Verbatim quotes
were then selected and coded to ensure anonymity and also
separate health workers from patients. Hence HW was used
528

to represent health worker and PAT for patient. While most
of the participant responses were reported verbatim, few of
them were edited to improve readability.
Results and Discussion
The findings and discussions are presented under two main
themes and five subthemes (Table) that were generated
manually from the interviews to represent the findings of the
study. These are knowledge and supposition (with subthemes:
awareness and general knowledge, training, and availability
and sensitization) and factors influencing operationalization
(with subthemes: promoting factors, and inhibiting factors)
The majority of respondents were females (13 of 20 patients;
and 3 of 5 healthcare workers). They were all adults aged
between 21 and 55 years.
Knowledge and Supposition
Awareness and Knowledge
Health workers of Kasoa Polyclinic are aware that every
patient has rights which must be respected. All the HWs
interviewed indicated promptly that patients, like all human
beings have rights which need to be respected. Additionally,
all HWs indicated their awareness of a document containing
a list of rights and responsibilities of patients – the Charter.
This buttresses previous quantitative finding in Ghana that
healthcare providers exhibit awareness and content knowledge
on the patients’ Charter, however, when it comes to knowledge
on the content of the Charter, the findings of the present study
quite differ from those of the previous study.26 The following
are some the responses gathered HWs were asked to explain
what the patients’ Charter is about:
“The patients’ Charter is a document that contains the
patients’ rights and responsibilities. It is a very important
document as most often patients’ rights are trampled upon
by health workers” (HW-O4).
“It is a document that spells out things like the right to
healthcare, right to privacy, not to be discriminated against”
(HW-02).
“In a nutshell it is a document that tells health workers about
the dos and don’ts when it comes to handling of patients in
this facility” (HW-05).
“Personally I have not seen the document but I know that the
Charter is to guide health workers in their daily interactions
with patients” (HW-01).
When HWs were asked to mention at least three rights and
three responsibilities of patients contained in the Charter,
only two of the five (40%) were able to provide some answers.
Thus, the content of the patients’ Charter include:
“The right to be treated well, respected and have some
privacy” (HW-04).
Table. Themes and Subthemes From Interviews With Health Workers
and Patients of Kasoa Polyclinic on the Operationalization of the
Ghanaian Patients’ Charter
Theme
Knowledge and supposition
Factors influencing the
operationalization of the Patients’
Charter

International Journal of Health Policy and Management, 2016, 5(9), 525–533

Subtheme
•
Awareness and knowledge
•
Availability and sensitization
•
Training and monitoring
•
•

Promoting factors
Inhibiting factors

Yarney et al

“Patients also have the responsibility to be respectful,
corporative in the care process and they must be treated fairly
and equally” (HW-04).
“Patients need to do their part in the care process by following
all the instructions we give them” (HW-02).
The health workers also expressed the usefulness of the
patients’ Charter in the care process. Thus:
“When patients know about the patient’s Charter it guides
us to be more cautious in handling the patients” (HW-02).
“It’s a very good tool that makes us aware of what the
patients’ rights are, makes patients aware of what their rights
and responsibilities are, helps me as a healthcare worker to
improve upon my service. This means we are able to ensure
that patients are treated well in the facility” (HW-04).
“Once, a patient who knows her rights confronted a nurse
when she felt the nurse was not polite to her because the
nurse had shouted and sneered when she was asked where
the lavatory is located in the facility. Most of the time nurses
feel that they know it all, but immediately you make them
know that you know your rights, they recoil and behave
civilly towards you. Sometimes they even request to be
transferred because of the embarrassment they face and this
is what happened in this case” (HW-05).
“If patients know their rights and responsibilities, health
workers will treat them with care and will uphold the rights
of patients” (HW-04).
Patients’ knowledge and awareness on their rights and
responsibilities revealed a stark reality. This is consistent with
other studies that have indicated low knowledge of patients’
Charter among patients, in fact, some patients have never
heard of patients’ rights before.27 Not only were PATs of this
study unaware of their rights, they seemed not to care about
them. Their sole aim as indicated by the majority (16 of 20)
of them was to get well as soon as possible and go back to
their economic activities. While 7 of 20 patients were not able
to express any knowledge on their rights and responsibilities,
the remaining 13 indicated they knew something. However,
their knowledge were mixed with regards to the content of
the Charter.
“I know that everyone should be accepted in this facility
and every patient should be treated equally. Also, it is my
responsibility to tell the truth about my condition, to be
honest about my condition and to respect the nurses who
take care of me, so they can take good care of me” (PAT-15).
“I have the right to be attended to and treated well as a
patient, to have access to all available services when the
need arises, and to have my information kept private and
confidential. It is my responsibility also to make myself
available and to make available every information required
to enable decision-making” (PAT-08).
“I have the right to ask questions concerning my health and
to obey what the nurses tell me to do” (PAT-03).
“I have to give the midwife something as a form of
appreciation for all her efforts” (PAT-18).
“To be honest about my condition” (PAT-20).
“To respect the nurses who take care of me” (PAT-09).
Awareness and knowledge of the content of both patients and
health staff on the patients’ Charter are two crucial elements in
operationalizing the patients’ Charter. In fact, a comprehensive
analysis of patients’ rights across five countries concluded that

irrespective of the comprehensiveness of a country’s statement
of rights, patients’ awareness and familiarity with the rights are
crucial to quality and effectiveness of the healthcare system.
The patients’ Charter is set to empower patients by providing
them with certain rights and entitlements as they interact
with healthcare providers and institutions, and to provide for
a more balanced patient-healthcare provider relationship on
a more equal pedestal. Outlining what is expected serves as
important guidelines for the delivery of healthcare services
by healthcare providers, institutions, and patients. Thus,
patients need to know their rights and responsibilities to
ensure that they take actions and ask questions relevant to
their care and delivery.28 Therefore, an effective and efficient
operationalization of patients’ Charters can be realized when
aggressive measures are put in place to ensure that both
patients and health workers are adequately informed about
their rights and responsibilities.
Availability and Sensitization on the Charter
The availability of the Charter is necessary to ensure knowledge
and adherence to respecting patients’ rights as well as patients’
responsibilities. According to the health workers interviewed,
a copy of the patients’ Charter was posted in all the units of
the facility, but because of the ongoing refurbishments in the
facility, all posters had been removed and will be posted after
the painting of the walls of the facility. They indicated that
they are quite often reminded to adhere to the Charter during
monthly and annual review meetings. Management also does
spot-checks occasionally to ensure that the patients are being
treated well as per the relevant portions of the tenets of the
patients’ Charter.
The Charter was not visible on the wards of the facility,
and this might have contributed to the poor knowledge on
the Charter among patients of the facility. The availability
of the Charter serves as a constant reminder to both health
workers and patients about the need to respect the provisions
in the Charter. Meeting patients’ needs must be the pivot of
healthcare for patients’ rights to be realized. Thus, the nonavailability of the Charter to both patients and health workers,
leads to low knowledge about the rights and responsibilities
of patients, lack of appreciable standard of practice among the
hospitals, and the impact of service pressure and subsequent
lack of holistic care, are some of the barriers to rights-based
practice among healthcare providers.15
Operationalization of the patients’ Charter requires
affirmative steps to educating the general public especially
patients. Thus, information and opportunities to learn about
issues such as the definition and reinforcement of patients’
rights should be available to everyone, not just to healthcare
professionals or patients. Mass communication media,
educational institutions, medical companies, political parties,
and religious groups should all have an important role to
play in the making the Charter available to all as well as its
reinforcement.
Training and Monitoring on the Charter
A proper managerial policy on training, monitoring, and
responsive managerial systems are necessary ingredients in
ensuring knowledge and operationalization of the patients’
Charter according to HW respondents. They believe these

International Journal of Health Policy and Management, 2016, 5(9), 525–533

529

Yarney et al

can be achieved through training and monitoring on the
Charter. Information gathered from the health worker
respondents indicated that although there are standards for
health professionals’ conduct that are taught in their training,
most of the tenets are flouted without the enforcement of
sanctions against perpetrators. Thus, monitoring with regards
to the tenets of the Charter is very weak in the facility and has
contributed to the low knowledge among health workers and
patients on the Charter.
With regards to training on the Charter, it was evident from
the interview with respondents in the health worker category
that there has not been any official training specifically on the
patients’ Charter. They explained that training is done in an
integrated manner and is mostly incorporated into customer
care trainings which are organized infrequently.
“Some customer care trainings do not even make mention of
the patients’ Charter at all” (HW-04).
Factors Influencing Operationalization of The Patients’
Charter
Promoting Factors
Almost all the health workers interviewed mentioned
availability of the Charter, sensitization, training and
monitoring on the Charter and enforcement of sanctions
against perpetrators as factors that would promote the
implementation of the tenets of the patients’ Charter in
public health institutions in the country. According to them
lack of these has contributed to the low knowledge and
operationalization of the Charter in the facility.
“If the Charter is made available everywhere, especially in
schools and the hospitals, a lot of people will know about
it and people will insist on their rights when they seek
healthcare” (HW-04).
“Sanctions against health workers who trample upon the
rights of patients or disrespect patients will deter others from
doing same, and would make the Charter effective” (HW01).
“Although as health workers, we are told to respect the rights
of patients, I believe that we will see the Charter at work
if we’re periodically called for training specifically on the
Charter” (HW-03).
The patient interviewees, 40% (8 of 20) felt that if more health
workers are trained and employed, the problems they face
with health workers with regards to interpersonal relationship
and ethical issues would be minimized. In addition, they
mentioned availability and creation of awareness as factors
that would facilitate its operationalization.
“Health workers are usually stressed out because of heavy
workload, and that makes them impatient most of the time. If
they are many, the work load will be less and would have time to
better interact with us, and make sure that our rights as patients
are upheld” (PAT-05).
“I haven’t set eyes on the patients’ Charter before, so I believe
that if the Charter is available and the public is made aware
of its contents, when we go to the hospital, we’ll be expecting
something that when we find absent, we will demand. This will
aid the implementation of the patients’ Charter” (PAT-16).
Inhibiting Factors
Several factors were found to inhibit the effective
530

operationalization of the patients’ Charter. These were grouped
into institutional implementation structures and complaint
procedure.
Institutional Implementation Structures
Although all respondents (HW) agreed that the patients’
Charter is an important tool to improve the care process, they
were quick to add that operationalizing the Charter requires
resources which when not available make operationalization
unrealistic. To these health workers, certain institutional
inadequacies such as lack of supervision, heavy work load
because of staff shortage, and lack of space and equipment as
well as basic logistics to ensure that the tenets of the Charter
are adhered to, make the operationalization of the Charter
very difficult. All respondents (HW and PAT) complained
that the facility is too small and respect for one’s privacy is a
challenge. The limited space in the facility gives patients no
grounds to complain when their rights are violated especially
with regards to issues of privacy.
“We’re committed to observing patients’ rights, but in order
to ensure for instance, confidentiality and privacy, there are
certain basic prerequisites such as expanded space, enough
tools and equipment. As you can see, this room is ideally
to take two patients but there are currently six patients
occupying it. How do we ensure privacy for example in this
situation?” (HW-02)
While HWs explained that patients again do not complain
because:
“They know the conditions in this facility and cannot complain
about something like privacy” (HW-05), patient respondents
also explained that they rarely complained because of fear of
being tagged as difficult. Although an in-patient who has been
on the ward for some time indicated that her last complaint
was well-addressed, she was afraid to complain again because
of what she witnessed when a patient tagged as difficult was
neglected most of the time.
“The last time I complained to the nurse about my
uncomfortable bed, the administrator came over to interview
me, and my bed was changed. I do not want to complain
again about the mosquitoes because I am sure the nurses will
think I complain too much and may not be friendly to me”
(PAT-18).
This observation is quiet abnormal elsewhere, where
individuals are very much aware of their rights and
responsibilities and would hold people accountable for
infringement. Unfortunately, in our local settings, especially
in rural communities where families are closely knit together,
individuals are taught to bear with each other even in difficult
situations for peace to prevail. Thus, in situations where
people are not very conversant with what their rights and
responsibilities are regarding their health, they tend to assume
positions of vulnerability, so as to receive fair care from their
healthcare givers.
All staff respondents further indicated staff shortages, heavy
workload and inadequate equipment as inhibitors to the
operationalization of the patients’ Charter. Extracts from the
interviews with health workers are as follows:
“The staff here are not enough. There is only one doctor
serving about 500 patients a day and it is even worse on
market days. How can he introduce himself to each patient,

International Journal of Health Policy and Management, 2016, 5(9), 525–533

Yarney et al

before he starts attending to them. He has to execute his work
as quickly as possible in order to attend to the next patient”
(HW- 02).
“Sometimes I’m so tired that I forget to be courteous as a
health worker. It is not easy to observe all the provisions of
the Charter with our workload. Our shifts are long and the
patients are many, so, it becomes difficult for us to observe
certain ethical responsibilities” (HW- 03).
This finding is in line with the empirical assertion that
the success of a policy depends critically on two broad
factors – local capacity and will, and the will to implement
a task is influenced by factors largely beyond the reach of
policy formulators.29 Thus, competing centres of authority,
contending priorities or pressures and other aspects of
socio-political environment can profoundly influence an
implementer’s willingness. This emphasis on individual
motivation and internal institutional conditions implies that
external policy features have limited influence on outcomes,
particularly at lower levels in the institution.29
Human and capital resources are very essential in executing
the tenets of the Charter. Similar studies attest to this fact. In a
qualitative research conducted in Israel concerning physicians’
opinions about the Patient’s Rights Law, the researchers
concluded that, although the law was very important, the work
conditions of physicians in Israel (time and place limitations)
made it difficult to implement it. They were concerned that
the law could be abused by patients, and may lead to medical
care being practiced defensively.30 Establishing patients’ rights
is a step towards protecting the rights of patients, yet the
violation of these rights is common in healthcare institutions,
and this is due to the presence of systemic and institutional
obstacles, such as insufficient healthcare staff, and inadequate
purchase and maintenance of technological equipment.14
Complaint Procedure
Findings of the study indicate that there is neither systematic
nor structured complaint procedure at the Kasoa healthcare
facility. All the health workers interviewed could not readily
explain how complaints are handled. Although a complaint
box sits in an obscure place close to the office of the
Administrator, it is rusted and has not been used for years.
One health Staff observed that patients rarely complain to her:
“Last January during the Municipal’s end of year
performance review, one of our media partners from PINK
FM lamented that the nurses of this facility are impolite to
patients. But I explained that the patient’s Charter and other
codes enshrine on us to be polite. Patients have every right to
report any misconduct to the senior nurse in-charge or the
Administrator, but most of the time we do not receive these
complaints, and this may be due to the absence of formal
complaint procedure in the facility” (HW-03).
The majority of patient respondents could not tell who to
complain to when their rights were violated by a health
worker in the facility. Patients who have had issues with the
care process at one point in time or another did not know the
process to follow for redress. A respondent who narrated his
experience with regards to how he was handled during his
last visit to the facility indicated that he did not even know the
identity of the staff handling him, thus, should there be the
need to lodge complaints, he would have to describe her using

her physical features.
“None of the nurses handling me introduced herself to me,
I only know them as aunty nurse and the doctor as chief,
so if they mishandle me all I can do is to use their physical
features to describe them if I want to seek redress” (PAT-10).
The adage ‘knowledge is power’ and ‘the doctor knows best’
are perhaps most appropriate in trying to describe what is
inhibiting the operationalization of the Charter at the Kasoa
Polyclinic. Because the majority of patients have no knowledge
on their rights and do not know of any steps to follow to get
their complaints addressed, they do not complain when their
rights are violated. Due to low level of knowledge on their
rights as patients, they do not insist on anything, but comply
with whatever the health worker instructs them to do, for ‘the
doctor knows best.’ This confirms the assertion in 2007, by
the Special Rapporteur on Health reporting to the Human
Rights Council which recognized the pivotal role that health
professionals can potentially play in promoting health within
a human rights framework.31 The realization of rights to the
highest attainable standard of health depends upon health
professionals enhancing public health, delivering medical
care, developing equitable health policies and programs and
making key decisions about priorities and resources within
governmental and non-governmental health sectors.31
However, health professionals of developing countries
may be unaware of human rights frameworks or may feel
uncomfortable about them,32 believing that it would put them
at risk or place unreasonable demands on them. These reasons
may have contributed to making the operationalization of the
Ghanaian Patients’ Charter almost impossible at the Kasoa
Polyclinic. When patients are empowered with the knowledge
on the tenets of the Charter, they will insist on them and
health workers will be alerted and work in conformity to the
tenets of the Charter.
Limitation of the Study
Because this study was carried out in a peri-urban public
hospital facility with a small number of study participants,
findings may be limited to the studied facility, however,
findings may not be very different from similar facilities
where infrastructure, human and material resources are
similar or the same. We recommend that future research
should focus on the role of various levels - national, regional,
and other district facilities in the implementation of the tenets
of the patients’ Charter, so as to ascertain the status of the
operationalization of Ghana’s Patients’ Charter.
Conclusion
Health workers at the Kasoa Polyclinic are aware and
knowledgeable of the patients’ Charter, however, the majority
of patients have no knowledge about their rights and
responsibilities, and hence, do not insist on them. This affects
a successful implementation of the patients’ Charter. Making
the patients’ Charter operational in the facility is marred by
institutional inadequacies as well as lack of knowledge among
patients. However, there exist opportunities for Management
of the facility to ensure that the operationalization of the
Charter is realized. These include making the patients’
Charter available, sensitizing community members, training
as well as monitoring activities of frontline health workers to

International Journal of Health Policy and Management, 2016, 5(9), 525–533

531

Yarney et al

ensure a successful operationalization of the Charter at the
facility.
Management of Kasoa Polyclinic and similar healthcare
facilities are encouraged to increase awareness of patients’
rights and responsibilities by posting and making copies
of the Charter available to patients, and through awareness
campaigns on local radio stations. Besides, constant
monitoring and surveys will reveal a lot about the effectiveness
of the campaigns conducted to raise awareness on patients’
rights and responsibilities. The Municipal Health Directorates
should urgently provide enough human and capital resources
in order to ensure that patients’ rights are respected in all
health facilities in their respective catchment areas. This
may be done by appointing a patient rights officer for the
Municipal Health directorate whose role among other things,
would be to ensure the implementation of the tenets of the
Charter in public health institutions in the Municipality. Mass
communication media, educational institutions, medical and
nursing organizations and councils, political parties and
religious groups should all have an important role to play in
the enforcement of the patients’ Charter.
Acknowledgements
We are thankful to Mr. Shadow, Head of Administration, and
staff of Kasoa Polyclinic, Central Region, Ghana for their
assistance in collecting data for this study. We acknowledge
all the participants for willingly consenting to be interviewed.
Our gratitude goes to Mr. E. Ahiah, Disease Control Officer of
the Awutu Senya East Municipal Health Directorate, Awutu
Senya, Ghana for the assistance offered when we called on
him for information.

5.

6.
7.

8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.
14.

15.

Ethical issues

Permission to undertake the study was sought from the Ethical Review
Committee of the GHS, Accra, Ghana with the study protocol. Additionally, a
letter of consent from the Municipal Directorate of Health Services was sought
before the study was conducted at the Kasoa Polyclinic, Central Region,
Ghana. All the participants who took part in the study were given informed
consent sheet to sign or thumbprint after the purpose and procedure of the
research had been clearly and thoroughly explained to them. Confidentiality,
privacy, protection from harm and respect for human rights and dignity of the
participants were maintained for all since their participation was voluntary, and
they could exit the study at any time if they wished without having to provide
any reason.

16.
17.
18.

19.

Competing interests

Authors declare that they have no competing interests.

20.
Authors’ contributions

LY: Formulation of concept, drafting and finalization of script. TB: Formulation
of concept data collection and drafting of script. DB: Formulation of script, data
collection, and drafting of script. JNB: Drafting and finalization of script.

References
1. World Bank. World Development Report 2002: Building
Institutions for Markets. New York: Oxford University Press;
2002.
2. Starfield B. Promoting equity in health through research and
understanding. Developing World Bioeth, 2004;14(4):76-95.
doi:10.1111/j.1471-8731.2004.00068.x
3. Dowie JA. Valuing the benefits of health improvement. Australian
Economic Papers. 1970;9:21-41.
4. World Health Organization (WHO). Promotion of the rights of
532

21.
22.

23.
24.
25.

patients in Europe. http://www.who.int/genomics/public/eu_
declaration1994.pdf. Published 1995.
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR). G.A. Res. 217A
(III). http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html. Accessed May 12,
2013. Published 1948.
London L. What Can Human Rights Do for Health and Health
Equity in South Africa? Crit Health Perspect. 2005;1:1-3.
Smith V, and Godfrey NS. Being a good nurse and doing the
right thing: A qualitative study. Nurs Ethics. 2002;9(3):301-312.
doi:10.1191/0969733002ne512oa
Silver MH. Patients’ rights in England and United States of
America: The patients’ Charter and the New Jersey Patient Bill
of Rights: a comparison. J Med Ethics. 1997;23(4):213-220.
doi:10.1136/jme.23.4.213
Health Professions Council of South Africa. National Patients’
Rights Charter. Booklet 3, Pretoria; 2008.
Federal Republic of Nigeria. Nigeria’s 4th Periodic Country
Report: 2008-2010 on the Implementation of the African Charter
on Human and People’s Rights in Nigeria. The Federal Ministry
of Justice, Abuja; 2008.
Rider ME, Makela CJ. A comparative analysis of patients’
rights: an international perspective. International Journal of
Consumer Studies. 2003;27(4):302-315. doi:10.1046/j.14706431.2003.00319.x
Changole J, Bandawe C, Makanani B, et al. Patients’
satisfaction with reproductive health services at Gogo chatinkha
Maternity unit Blantyre, Malawi. Malawi Med J. 2010;22(1):5-6.
doi:10.4314/mmj.v22i1.55899
Zülfikar F, Ulusoy MF. Are patients aware of their rights? A
Turkish study. Nurs Ethics. 2001;8(6):487-498.
Büken NO, Büken,E. Emerging health sector problems affecting
patients’ rights in Turkey. Nurs Ethics. 2004;11(6):610-624.
doi:10.1191/0969733004ne742oa
Albishi AA. The Saudi patients’, physicians’, and nurses’
perceptions of and lived experiences with patients’ rights in
Saudi Arabia: A Qualitative Phenomenological Study [Doctoral
Dissertation]. George Manson University; 2004.
Ghana Health Service. The Patients’ Charter. Accra, Ghana
Health Service; 2002.
Ghana Health Service. Report on clinical care quality assurance
conference. Accra, Ghana: 2012.
Abekah-Nkrumah G, Manu A, Atinga AR. Assessing
the implementation of Ghana’s Patient Charter. Health
Educ.2010;110(3):169-185. doi:10.1108/09654281011038840
Royal Health Organisation (ROHEO). Clients and health staff
lack knowledge in patients Charter. http://www.newsghana.com.
gh/clients-and-health-staff-lack-knowledge-in-patients-Charter/.
Accessed August 19, 2013.
Vuković M, Gvozdenović BS, Stamatović-Gajić B, Ilić M,
Gajić T. Development and evaluation of the nurse quality of
communication with patient questionnaire. Srpski Arhiv za
Celokupno Lekarstvo, 2010;138(1-2):79-84
Topping, A. Qualitative perspectives. Nurse Researcher.
2006;13(4):4-6.
Burns T, Catty J, White S, et al. Continuity of care in mental health:
understanding and measuring a complex phenomenon. Psychol
Med. 2009;39:313-323. doi:10.1017/s0033291708003747
Lincoln YS, Guba EG. Naturalistic Inquiry. Thousand Oaks:
Sage Publishers; 1985.
Brink H. Fundamentals of Research Methodology for Health
Care Professionals. Cape Town: Juta and Company Ltd; 2006.
Wolf ZR. Exploring the Audit Trail for Qualitative Investigations.
Nurse Educator. 2003;28(4):175-178. doi:10.1097/00006223200307000-00008

International Journal of Health Policy and Management, 2016, 5(9), 525–533

Yarney et al
26. Malterud K. Shared Understanding of the Qualitative Research
Process. Guidelines for the Medical Researcher. Family Practice.
1993;10(2):201-206. doi:10.1093/fampra/10.2.201
27. Changole JC, Bandawe B, Makanani K, Nkanaunena F, Taulo
EM, Kafulafula G. Patients’ satisfaction with reproductive health
services at Gogochatinkha Maternity Unit Blantyre, Malawi.
Malawi Med J. 2010;22(1):5-6. doi:10.4314/mmj.v22i1.55899
28. Rider ME, Makela CJ. A comparative analysis of patients’rights:
an international perspective. International Journal of
Consumer Studies. 2003;27(4):302-315. doi:10.1046/j.14706431.2003.00319.x
29. Matland RE. (Synthesizing the implementation literature: The
ambiguity- conflict model of policy implementation. J Public Adm

Res Theory. 1995;5(2):145-174.
30. Steinmetz D, Tabenkin H. The difficult patient as perceived by
family physicians. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2011.
31. UN Human Rights Council. Report of the Special Rapporteur on
the Right of Everyone to the Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable
Standard of Physical and Mental Health, Paul Hunt: addendum:
Missions to the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund in Washington, D.C. (20 October 2006) and Uganda (4-7
February
2007).
http://www.refworld.org/docid/47da904c2.
html. Accessed June 23, 2015.
32. Barrera CR, Negron CP, Barria M, Mendez CA. Rights and
Duties Policy Implementation in Chile: Healthcare Professionals’
Perceptions. Health Expectat. 2015. doi:10.1111/hex.12396

International Journal of Health Policy and Management, 2016, 5(9), 525–533

533

