Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6
DOI 10.1186/s12889-014-1332-7

RESEARCH ARTICLE

Open Access

Qualitative study on the socio-cultural
determinants of care of children orphaned by
AIDS in the Ashanti and Eastern regions of Ghana
Lily Yarney1, Chuks Mba2 and Emmanuel Asampong1*

Abstract
Background: Almost three decades after the discovery of HIV and AIDS in Ghana, the most obvious impact of the
disease is the growing orphan crisis affecting most families and communities, especially in areas that the
prevalence of HIV has exceeded the epidemic’s threshold of 5%. Studies have indicated that these orphans usually
experience a wide range of problems which include education, nutrition, physical and sexual abuse, emotional and
psychological distress, stigma and discrimination, among others The aim of the study was to examine the social,
cultural, and traditional norms and practices that influence the care of children orphaned by AIDS in Ghana.
Methods: The study employed focus group discussions, in-depth interviews and key informant interviews to generate
information on the socio-cultural factors that impact orphan care in the Ashanti and Eastern regions of Ghana.
Results: The findings indicated that the cultural practices that influence how well an AIDS orphan is taken care of by
their caregivers include traditional rituals, ceremonies, and norms like funeral rites, marriage and naming ceremonies,
festivals, inheritance, polygyny, and puberty rites. The social factors mentioned to affect orphan care significantly were:
excessive alcohol drinking, and tobacco and drug use, dressing with fashion, night club attendance, market days,
stigma and discrimination, among others.
Conclusion: It is recommended that though some cultural and traditional practices are deeply rooted in communities
and cannot be done away completely, orphan care policies on interventions should take into account these factors to
mitigate their effects on the care of orphans.
Keywords: Children orphaned by AIDS, Social and cultural factors, Orphans care

Background
Almost three decades after the discovery of HIV and
AIDS in Ghana, the most obvious impact of the disease
is the growing orphan crisis affecting most families and
communities, especially in areas that the prevalence of
HIV has exceeded the epidemic’s threshold of 5%. We
define AIDS orphans as children under 18 years of age
who have lost their mothers, fathers, or both parents to
AIDS [1]. Studies have indicated that these orphans usually experience a wide range of problems which include
education, nutrition, physical and sexual abuse, emotional
and psychological distress, stigma and discrimination,
among others [2-9]. A study also found that orphans
* Correspondence: easampong@ug.edu.gh
1
School of Public Health, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

under the patrilineal system of inheritance are better
cared for than those under the matrilineal system [10].
These orphans tend to grow up in harsh environments
and challenging circumstances. While ensuring the
safety, wellbeing, and development of these orphans is
challenging, the risks of a generation without adequate
family support, education and opportunities are too great
to be ignored.
Several studies have examined the situation and the
plight of orphans across many locations in Africa, to include physical health, schooling, bereavement process,
and psychological well-being [5,6,9,11-13], but lacking in
these studies is the impact of socio-cultural practices
and norms on orphan care, which are equally important if
effective and meaningful interventions for orphans are to
be achieved. Although community-based interventions are

© 2015 Yarney et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0) applies to the data made available in this article, unless
otherwise stated.

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

urgently needed as the most appropriate way of addressing
the rising orphan problem, the complex local reality in
which cultural factors, kinship ties and poverty are interwoven, needs to be taken into consideration if sustainable
solutions are to be found [4]. Data of this nature are unfortunately limited in sub-Saharan Africa where problems
of children orphaned by AIDS are most prevalent.
It is against this background that we undertook this
study in two regions of Ghana, the Ashanti and Eastern,
where the prevalence of HIV has been consistently high
since 1986 when HIV and AIDS were first identified in
the country. The objective was to examine the social,
cultural, and traditional norms and practices that influence the care of children orphaned by AIDS in Ghana.
These socio-cultural factors are essentially the totality of
societal and population processes that shape and guide
the people in their day-to-day dealings.

Methods
The study was conducted in two purposively selected
districts from the Eastern Region, and one metropolitan
area and one district from the Ashanti Region, making a
total of three study districts and one study metropolis.
Within each selected district and metropolis, two communities were selected, yielding a total of eight study
sites.
Children orphaned by AIDS and their caregivers were
identified in the Ashanti Region through some nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) working on HIV
and AIDS and orphan care, in the study sites. In the
Eastern Region, they were identified through staff of the
Atua District Hospital, “Persons Living With HIV and
AIDS” (PLWHA) and an NGO working with them.
In each of the two selected regions (within the districts and metropolis, and the selected communities
within these areas), six groupings, made up of nine to
twelve persons were selected purposively for Focus Group
Discussions (FGDs). For the two selected districts in each
of the study regions, two FGDs were conducted among adolescents – one for girls 12 to 17 years, and one for boys 12
to 17 years. Two FGDs were conducted among adults, one
for women 18 years and above, the majority of whom were
caregivers, and one for men 18 years and older. One FGD
was conducted for orphans, and one for PLWHA. Thus, a
total of 12 FGDs were conducted in the four selected districts in the two study regions. The purpose of the FGD
was to collect spontaneous and general information on issues pertinent to orphans in the communities. In each of
the study regions two traditional leaders were purposively
selected for Key Informant Interviews (KIIs). Thus, four (4)
KIIs were conducted at the regional level. Interviews with
these persons were aimed at gathering information on the
cultural norms and practices of their respective localities
such as historical background, marriage, puberty rites, child

Page 2 of 13

rearing, inheritance issues, and their implications for orphan care. At the district and metropolitan level, Twenty
(20) KIIs were held with district officials whose responsibilities had a bearing on HIV and AIDS and on orphan
care, NGOs, FBOs, PLWHA, and Assembly men.
In-Depth interviews were also held at the community
level with orphans aged between 10 and 17 years, and
caregivers. In each of the study districts and metropolis,
ten (10) in-depth interviews were conducted, with five
(5) orphans and five (5) caregivers. Thus a total of forty
(40) in-depth interviews were organised. The purpose of
these interviews was to gather in-depth information from
orphans and caregivers on how orphans are cared for, the
issues that affect their care, their needs, feelings, perceptions and experiences.
The FGD and KII data collection instruments were
pre-tested in purposively selected districts close to the
study districts to determine their appropriateness for
collecting the desired data. This exercise was used to test
clarity, suitability as well as the logical flow of questions.
The instruments were refined on the basis of issues that
were raised and noted during the pre-testing exercise.
The pre-test also helped to adapt the tools to the study
objectives, and improved on the data collection techniques of the data collection team. Following the pretest and subsequent revisions, the tools were rehearsed
in Asante Twi language in the Ashanti Region and in
Adangme language in the Eastern Region before they
were used for the actual data collection.
The study was approved by the Ethical Review Committee of the Ghana Health Service (GHS) with identification number GHS-ERC: 13/3/08. Further, verbal and
written consent were obtained from all illiterate and
literate caregivers on behalf of all orphans. For those orphans who were less than 16 years, their caregivers were
required to provide consent on their behalf to qualify
them to partake in the study. All of them availed themselves willingly and without duress to participate in the
study completely. Consent was also sought from all participants who were 16 years and above. The consent
form which detailed the purpose of the study stated the
fact that participation was voluntary and that participants could quit at any point in time during the process.
Study procedures were thoroughly explained to all the
participants and confidentiality was assured and maintained throughout the study. Consequently, all participants who agreed to be part of the study continued to
the end of the study.
Responses from the Key Informant Interviews, indepth interviews and Focus Group Discussions were first
recorded using MP3 recorder and transcribed. The data
were analysed on the basis of emerging themes and subthemes in the context of the study framework. The findings on social practices and cultural norms and how they

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

Page 3 of 13

affect orphan care were grouped and presented in two
main sections. The first section presents the cultural practices and norms whilst the second section presents the social factors reported to impact on orphan care in the two
study regions. Findings were also presented in a bidimensional manner where possible, that is, social and
cultural factors inherent in the study communities on the
part of the caregiver that affect his or her ability to care
for the orphan, and those on the part of the orphan that
do not auger well for his or her care and wellbeing.

Results
Table 1 shows the frequencies of the social and cultural
factors that were mentioned by participants involved in
FGDs, Key Informants Interviews, and in-depth interviews as affecting orphan care.
Cultural practices and norms and their impact on orphan
care

Study participants in all the study districts and metropolis
viewed traditional rites and cultural ceremonies as factors
that affect orphan care in their communities. These include
funerals; inheritance; marriage ceremonies, polygyny; naming ceremonies; puberty rites (especially among the Krobo);
festivals and other traditional rituals.

Funeral rites and other traditional ceremonies

Traditional rites in Ghana usually cover the rights of
passage of child-birth, puberty, marriage and death.
These celebrations are considered important and memorable in the lives of people, and provide fulfilling moments to many families and communities [14]. However,
funeral rites and marriage ceremonies (engagements and
weddings) were reported to particularly affect orphan
care in that a lot of money that could be useful in the
care of orphans is diverted to organizing such traditional
activities.
Funerals are celebrated in honour of the dead, thus, participants from both the Ashanti and Eastern regions view
funerals as such, and therefore place a great deal of importance on the funeral ceremonies of family members
and loved ones. Study participants from the Ashanti region believe that a person’s worth is unveiled at his funeral, hence, when an individual loses a relative, he is
expected to perform befitting funeral rites, and if he is not
able to do so, he is looked down upon by his community
[15]. It is therefore not surprising that people attach much
importance to funeral rites and would use money to buy
clothes, shoes, bags, drinks, etc. and for public donations
instead of using it for the provision of basic needs for
children.

Table 1 Socio-cultural factors impacting on orphan care
Factors affecting orphan care

Focus group discussions (12)

Key informants interviews (24)

In-depth interviews (40)

Cultural factors

Freq.

%

Freq.

%

Freq.

%

Traditional Ceremonies: Funeral Rites

12

100.0

23

95.8

36

90.0

Marriage Ceremonies

10

83.3

14

58.3

22

55.0

Out-dooring of Babies

10

83.3

14

58.3

20

50.0

Traditional Rituals: Festivals

8

66.7

16

66.7

15

37.5

10

83.3

18

75.0

25

62.5

12

100.0

19

79.2

20

50.0

7

58.3

12

50.0

13

35.0

Alcohol and Hard Drugs

12

100.0

22

91.7

34

85.0

Social Eating and Drinking

8

66.7

14

58.3

21

52.5

Extravagant Living

6

50.0

13

54.2

23

57.5

Fashion

12

100.0

21

87.5

34

85.0

Puberty Rites
Traditional Norms: Inheritance
Polygyny
Social Factors

Sports and Games

10

83.3

16

66.7

15

37.5

Films/Video/Drama

7

58.3

15

62.5

18

45.0

Night Clubs/Discos

9

75.0

15

62.5

16

40.0

Traditional Dances

5

41.7

12

50.0

11

27.5

Market Days

7

58.3

14

58.3

24

60.0

Church Worship

6

50.0

13

54.2

14

35.0

Peer Influence

8

66.7

8

33.3

8

20.0

Stigma and Discrimination

10

83.3

17

70.8

28

70.0

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

The Ashanti region participants identified about five
phases of death, funeral rites and ceremonies that are
costly and time consuming. These phases are imminent
death, where the initial announcement of a person’s
death involves purchasing of drinks and travelling long
distances to inform distant relatives and significant
others, printing of posters and the one-week celebration.
Phase Two involves pre-burial and mourning when the
place where the corpse will be laid in state is refurbished
and decorated with expensive materials among other rituals. During this phase, community members are expected
to make cash donations to the bereaved family. Study participants mentioned that if a community member does
not make donations towards other people’s funerals, when
he is bereaved, no one will make cash donations to support him, because ‘woyε a nayεyε ma wo’ (when you do it
for others, they will also do it for you).
Phase Three is the interment which involves stuffing
the coffin of the dead with expensive gifts from the
widow, orphans, family and even friends. FGD participants indicated that some family members demand very
expensive coffin and other items from the widow and
her children to the extent that the widow is usually left
with no money to immediately care for the needs of her
children. Phase Four was described as the grand funeral
which begins the day following the burial with widowhood rites and other preparations toward the grand funeral. Participants lamented that during these times,
heavy sums of money are spent especially on the part of
the widow and her children as well as the family of the
deceased which may impoverish the widow for the rest
of her life, thus:
“She may never be able to educate her children
afterwards, even what to eat may be a problem for the
rest of their lives” (FGD, Women, Kumasi Metropolis).
The last phase (Phase Five) is the periodic mourning
where the dead is remembered during festive seasons
like Easter, and Adae festivals where funerals are held
for all the dead members of the community. Reports indicated that some people borrow money to perform funeral rites because they want to be respected socially,
and they have to pay afterwards at times with interest,
leaving them with little or no money to care for their
families.
It was also reported in the Ashanti region that new
clothes are purchased for almost every funeral, engagement/wedding or naming/out-dooring ceremonies. These
festivities occur almost every day, therefore spending on
new clothing, making donations, and other related expenses
continue unabated. Such expenditures diminish the physical money (on the part of the caregiver) to be spent on caring for orphans and other family members.

Page 4 of 13

“It is traditionally acceptable to sometimes borrow
money to organize extravagant funerals and pay for
funeral donations, while the needs of children
haven’t been provided for. Some people would buy
new cloth for funerals, out-dooring, engagements
and weddings, when their children do not have
presentable school uniforms” (FGD, Caregivers,
Sekyere East District).
“My mother (aunt) buys new cloth for every occasion,
and I feel that is why she always complains of not
having enough money to cater for the house and my
schooling” (Orphan, Sekyere East District).
It was also reported in both study regions that funerals
are organized over long periods, and some caregivers
hop from one funeral to another spending a lot of time
with friends and other family members chatting, drinking and eating. Thus they spend very little time with
their children and orphans leaving them on their own
without adequate supervision. In addition, when more
hands are needed in the preparation and organization of
funeral rites and traditional ceremonies, some orphans
are asked by their caregivers to assist instead of going to
school.
In the Eastern region especially, the week-long funeral
activities of drumming and dancing both day and night
as reported by participants, finds many children including orphans, entertaining themselves. Some orphans
place priority on such activities because that is their
source of enjoyment and would even forego school during funerals and other traditional ceremonies.
“Orphans leave school almost every week-end for
funerals, and at times do not return to school, so we
are forced to look for some other orphans to replace
them in school, for us we have to meet our target”
(NGO Worker, Manya Krobo).
It was also mentioned that during such activities, adolescents and the youth learn to ingest alcoholic drinks,
because they are usually served for free and this can be
detrimental to their future if not controlled.
Because alcohol is served free during funerals,
everyone is served. Some of the children drink and
become intoxicated. If this continues, they develop the
habit of drinking alcohol” (Assembly Man, Manya
Krobo).
Traditional rituals

Two main traditional rituals reported by participants
from both regions to affect orphan care are festivals, and
puberty rites.

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

Festivals In the Kumasi Metropolis, a lot of preparation
is made towards the celebration of the Adae Kese festival
which is held to climax the celebrations of some specific
achievements and milestones of the Asante Kingdom.
FGD participants and informants in the Sekyere East
District mentioned both the Adae Kese and the Papa
Festivals as events that seem to affect orphan care. In the
Eastern region, the festivals mentioned are Ngmayem,
kloyomsikplemi, and Easter. In all cases, participants explained that throughout the year people including the
youth work, set aside money, and prepare to celebrate
these festivals. New and expensive clothing are worn during festivals, lots of tobacco and alcohol are consumed,
traditional dishes prepared and served, and lot of time
spent drumming and dancing. In fact, to the majority of
participants, the festival provides them the opportunity to
re-unite with their loved ones and hence they must be
very well prepared for that. As a result, money saved for
festivals would not be used on things like paying school
fees, feeding or paying for health services of orphans or
other family members in need.
FGDs also revealed that some of the orphans and youth
look forward to meeting old and new friends to enable
them have fun. This may lead to teenage pregnancies, HIV
and other sexually transmitted infections. When teenagers
get pregnant, they hardly set eyes on the man responsible
for the pregnancy through to their deliveries. Consequently, while some commit abortion and die, others die
out of the stress of being single mothers, thus increasing
the burden of orphans in the community:
“A girl came to Manya from a nearby village to
witness the festival, when she went back to the village,
she realised she was pregnant but could not identify
the man who impregnated her because she slept with
more than one man. In fact, the Ngmayem Festival for
the Manya area and the Kloyom Sikplemi for the Yilo
area are presently doing more harm than ever to the
youth especially orphans” (NGO Worker, Manya
Krobo District).
“My niece became pregnant during the 1998 Ngmayem
festival and could not tell who impregnated her, so the
burden of care of the child has fallen on me,
unfortunately I do not have enough money to take her
to senior high school when she completes her basic
education” (FGD Men, Manya Krobo District).
Puberty rites Puberty rites are performed for girls to
mark the beginning of their maturity for marriage and
sexual activity. Effects of puberty rites on orphan care
were mostly mentioned in the Eastern region. It was explained that once puberty rites are performed, orphans
are especially left to cater for themselves. Some of these

Page 5 of 13

girls go after men for their basic needs, stop schooling,
and travel outside their usual places of residence and engage in commercial sex work. Some contract HIV and
come back home to die. Dipo, the puberty rite of the
Krobo of the Eastern region was reported as becoming a
negative practice, because it is now exposing girls as
young as seven years old to sexual activity with all its attendant problems.
“Dipo is having negative effects on educating the girl
child, because parents go for thire children from school
for dipo. Consequently, these children absent
themselves from school for more than three weeks, and
some are never able to catch up with school work”
(NGO Worker, Yilo Krobo District).
“Immediately after Dipo, my aunt (uncle’s wife)
refused to give me anything I ask for, and I can tell
from all indications that she feels I’m of age for a
relationship with a man, so she does not see why I
should continue bothering her and the husband
financially, but I still go to school” (Orphan,16 years,
Yilo Krobo District).
“I know of a nice girl in this community who vanished
only a few months after Dipo had been performed for
her, and now reports reaching us indicate that she is a
sex worker in Abidjan” (School Teacher, Manya Krobo
District).
“My sister’s daughter is of the same age as my
daughter, so the family asked for Dipo to be performed
for them, but I refused, so they started calling me
names, I was forced to give my niece out for Dipo
because I was the caregiver, and refused it for my
daughter. Soon after, my niece travelled to Lome, and
about two months ago, she came back very ill only to
die later but my daughter is now in the university”
(Assemblyman, Manya Krobo District).
It was also indicated that some girls become rude and insolent after the rites have been performed for them, so their
guardians or caregivers drive them away from their homes.
“My elder brother asked my niece who is an orphan to
leave his home because she was very disrespectful and
rude to him after Dipo. Who knows, she may have a
boyfriend who gives her money” (FGD, women, Yilo
Krobo District).
Dipo was also reported to negatively affect the schooling of girls because, as soon as it is performed, men start
going after the girls, and most of them end up pregnant
and therefore stop schooling.

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

Another traditional ritual that was mentioned in the
Eastern region which impacts on orphan care is Lapomi.
It involves the performance of the necessary rites by a
man to claim children born out of wedlock since such
children are regarded as belonging to the woman’s father.
Lapomi can be very expensive and if this is done at the
death of the mother of the children, the man is usually left
with nothing to adequately cater for the orphans.
Traditional norms

The traditional norms reported to affect orphan care in
the two study regions were Inheritance and Polygyny.
Inheritance In the Eastern region, study participants reported that the patrilineal system of inheritance in itself is
not a bad thing since children are supposed to inherit
whatever property that belongs to their father. Ufortunately, what really happens is that, if parents especially the
father dies whilst his children are young, the inheritor usually uses the inherited property for his own benefit and
that of his own children. The inheritor sometimes totally
neglects the widow and the orphans. Thus, property that
is to be handed over to orphans when they grow up is
taken up by the inheritor and keeps for his own children.
The orphan therefore continues to suffer to a point of
even becoming wayward and rebel when he grows up.
“Patrilineal inheritance in itself is not a bad thing but
most inheritors are greedy and use all the property for
themselves and their own children, neglecting the
orphans who should actually own the property had they
not been children” (FGD Men, Yilo Krobo District).
Patrilineal inheritance is indicated to be good for the
orphan only when the deceased left behind some property that the caregiver can fall on in taking care of the
orphan, otherwise it places financial difficulties on the
caregiver.
“Patrilineal inheritance is good, because if the dead
father of the orphans has any property, it goes to his
children, but if he leaves nothing behind as in the case
of my brother and his wife, then the caregiver who
might be the father’s relative as I am should struggle
to take care of the orphans” (Blind Caregiver, 70 years,
Manya Krobo District).
Reports again indicated that if the deceased did not
fully marry the woman with whom he had children, his
property and wealth are transferred to his family and
placed directly in the hands of his inheritor and his children. The orphans suffer neglect from the deceased’s
family, and their care directly falls on the maternal family. If the woman also dies as is usually the case in HIV

Page 6 of 13

infection, care of orphans becomes the responsibility of
the direct inheritor of the woman. In any case, the children may suffer depending on who the inheritor is:
“Properties belonging to dead mothers of fatherless
children by custom belong to the orphans, but are
inherited by their maternal grandfather who may use the
property for himself and his own children. Where there
are farmlands he usually gives empty land which yields
nothing to the orphans” (Male Caregiver, Manya Krobo).
The natives of the Ashanti region on the other hand
practice a matrilineal system of inheritance, and hold the
belief that when a man dies, his children belong to their
mother, as such, the deceased’s family neglect the orphans. Study findings however, indicated that tradition
demands that the inheritor should also take care of the
widow and orphans. On the contrary, most inheritors do
not care for the orphans because of the perception that
the orphans belong to their maternal family and that the
rightful owners of the deceased’s property are his sisters’
children. The orphans according to the matrilineal system
of inheritance are supposed to inherit from their maternal
uncles, hence their responsibility to care for them. The
people from the Ashanti region hold the perception that if
any property of the deceased is transferred to the orphans,
that property would be lost forever to the widow’s family.
Consequently, the paternal family usually feels reluctant to
assist the widow in taking care of orphans. This situation
is captured in the following quotes:
“Oheneba ne nea ne papa tease, egya bi wu a egya bi
tease deε, yεde daadaa awisia”(The king’s child is the
one whose father is alive. The saying that when one’s
father dies, there is another one alive is only to woo
the paternal orphan) (FGD Men, Kumasi Metropolis).
“I am taking care of two orphans, but the person who
inherited their father does not care about them and
would not assist me in anyway” (Caregiver who is the
maternal grandmother of orphans, Sekyere East District).
“Our father’s family do not take care of us, because
they say we belong to our mothers family, so the only
person who cares for us is our mother’s sister”
(Orphan, Sekyere East District).
“Sometimes, the one who inherits the dead father takes
all the material things without taking care of the
children, the maternal system of inheritance is really
worrying” (Caregiver, Sekyere East District).
“I will say that matrilineal system of inheritance is
very bad, because when my father died, his father (my

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

grandfather) threw us out of the house that we were
living in as a family, now my mother is very ill, and
cannot take care of us. It is my aunt (mother’s sister)
who is taking care of my mother and me. The
remaining three of my siblings are living with people
who are not family members. I recently heard that one
of my paternal uncles wants to sell my father’s house,
so I decided to inform another paternal uncle abroad.
When I told him about it, his response was that, when
the house is sold, he has a share in it because my
father owed him some money. I was very disappointed
and sad” (Orphan, Kumasi Metropolis).
Study findings also indicated that under the matrilineal
system of inheritance, if the man leaves a will or property for the wife and children, then the widow and orphans can have something to fall on, otherwise the
paternal family takes everything from them and ends relationship with the widow and the orphans. Thus:
“Even if the orphans greet them, they may not
respond” (FGD, Caregivers, Kumasi Metropolis).
Polygyny Polygyny was indicated in the study regions as
a cultural norm that affects the care of orphans. It was
explained that some men who are caregivers of orphans
marry more than one woman, limiting their resources to
adequately cater for their children and orphans under
their care. When this happens, it is the orphan that suffers most because he is the least of priorities. A man
with more than one wife spends little time with each of
his wives and children; hence children under his care do
not have adequate supervision and engage in all kinds of
unacceptable behaviours.
“Gone are the days when men married many women so
they can have a lot of children to assist on the farm.
Presently every child is going to school, and the economic
situation is difficult, so if you marry more than one wife
and have many children with limited resources, taking
care of them is difficult let alone the orphans under your
care. (Caregiver, Sekyere East District).
Community social practices and their impact on orphan care

The social practices reported to impact on care of orphans include excessive alcohol, tobacco and hard drug
use, rampant social eating and drinking, fashion, films,
night clubs, games and sports, religious gatherings, and
stigma and discrimination.
Alcohol and hard drugs

Alcohol use is common in many communities in Ghana,
it is used for entertainment purposes, said to promote

Page 7 of 13

unity and togetherness, and for some, alcohol and drug
use takes their minds off their problems or minimizes
their hindrances. In all the twelve FGDs conducted in both
study regions, and about 90% of informants of in-depth interviews indicated that alcohol, tobacco and other drug
use impact heavily on orphan care. Actions and corresponding behaviours of alcoholics were identified and discussed among participants. Findings indicated that when
people, especially men get drunk or are under the influence of hard drugs, their judgements and reasoning get
impaired, become wild, and many women and children including orphans fall victim to some of their unintended
actions, some even get raped and infected with HIV.
Such drugs are also addictive and once an individual is
addicted, he or she will do all in his power to acquire it.
Thus, when a caregiver is a drunkard or a drug addict,
his first priority is to use his money for drinks or drugs.
Drunkards usually lose control over orphans under their
care, and do not show any good examples for the orphans to emulate. Some of these orphans may grow up
and become alcoholics and drug addicts as well. Some
women and orphan girls who abuse drugs and alcohol
are usually taken advantage of by men.
It was mostly reported by orphans that alcoholic caregivers usually maltreat them because they see them as an
economic burden. Some orphans reported that they are
even afraid of going back home from school, because their
drunkard caregivers may beat them, insult them, blame
them unnecessarily, and even curse them sometimes.
“It is very difficult living with an alcoholic father,
because when he gets drunk, he doesn’t know where he
puts his money, or whether he’s already spent it, he
wakes up in the morning accusing you of stealing his
money and starts beating you” (FGD, Boys, Kumasi
Metropolis).
Social eating, drinking and extravagant living

It was mentioned especially in the Ashanti region that
people find it very entertaining spending time with friends
in restaurants and bars, eating and drinking. People have
developed such habits, and it is very difficult for them
to stop when they marry and bear children or when they
are supposed to be responsible for orphans. This lifestyle
leaves them little money and time to take care of their dependants. Reports also indicated that for those who engage
in such social activities, they prefer showing off to their
drinking and eating counterparts by buying them food and
drinks. Some women were reported to give money to their
boyfriends for such purposes at the neglect of their dependants including orphans. Ostentatious spending favourite
food and drinks from restaurants and bars were reported
by some orphans as the reason why their caregivers cannot
provide them with some of their needs.

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

“My ‘mother’ likes sandwich and eggs, and she finds
money to buy every day, but my school uniform is
worn out and she never finds money to buy me a new
one” (Orphan, Kumasi Metropolis).
“My uncle always comes home very late in the night
because he spends a lot of time with his friends in the
bar drinking and eating. He always comes home very
satisfied and does not care whether we have eaten or
not, he does not supervise our school work” (Orphan,
Kumasi Metropolis).
Study participants in both regions lamented that spending too much money and time on social activities render
caregivers economically unable to provide for the needs of
the orphans in their care. It also takes them away from
home thus, neglecting some of the parental and supervisory roles. This makes some orphans vulnerable to many
bad practices including pilfering and other social vices.
Placing priority on building houses was also mentioned
as having effect on care of orphans. Some FGD participants
indicated that some people place priority on acquiring
physical properties than providing for the needs of their dependants. When this happens, orphans especially are affected and resort to other means of satisfying their needs.
“My uncle has not been able to buy me books the
whole of this year, but he is building a house that we
go there to work at times, he always complains of not
having enough money” (Orphan, Yilo Krobo District).
Fashion

Fashion was mentioned as a factor that affects the care of
children and orphans. Informants and FGD participants reported that women especially follow fashion and spend a lot
of money on their hair, bleaching creams, new cloth and
kaba styles, shoes, bags and the like. This puts strain on limited financial resources for the care of children and orphans.
A number of orphans whose caregivers are women felt that,
this is the main reason why they do not have adequate attention from their caregivers in the provision of their basic
needs, especially food, clothing, education and health.
“My mother buys every cloth in fashion and makes all
the new styles available in town, but we do not have the
freedom of eating what we yearn for like rice and
chicken stew, because for her, that is luxury that she
cannot afford quite frequently, so we only eat it at home
during Christmas or when there is funeral in the family”
(FGD, Young Boys, Kumasi Metropolis).
Sports and games

Sports and games affect the care of children in the sense
that some parents and guardians are addicted to them.

Page 8 of 13

Football was mostly mentioned, and it was explained
that caregivers usually spend a lot of time with friends
watching football in the evenings and on weekends,
when they could spend that time with their children,
and supervise their home work. In the rural areas, some
caregivers will spend much time playing draught without
doing any work to assist their dependants economically.
“My uncle plays dame (draught) the whole day, and
wouldn’t do anything apart from that, so when you
ask him money for school, he will always refer you to
his wife, because she is a petty trader”(FGD, Young
Boys, Sekyere East District).
Participants also explained that orphans and other
children who play a lot of football and other games tend
to neglect their school work, and do not do well in
school. Some are influenced by friends into doing all
kinds of bad things, including stealing to buy food from
outside the home. On the other hand, some participants
felt that football and other games help take the minds of
children off engaging in social vices.
Films/video shows and drama

Film shows and drama are very entertaining and for
caregivers who like watching them. They buy all the new
films in town, or go to the theatre to pay and watch.
These monies, FGD participants from both study regions
explained, could be used to cater for the needs of children to enhance their quality of life.
Drama especially on television was mentioned as affecting the welfare of children in the sense that, what is
watched is usually not monitored and these children learn
bad behaviours from the films and drama they watch.
Nigerian movies were particularly mentioned to portray
violence. Children who watch television a lot also neglect
their school work and usually do not do well in school,
though it keeps them in the home most of the time.
Night clubs/discos and traditional dances

Dancing is viewed by most people as a social event that indicates happiness and unity. Some FGD participants and
informants across both regions mentioned night clubs and
traditional dancing as having effect on care of children
and orphans. For caregivers who indulge in such activities,
their finances are affected since such activities involve
drinking as well, limiting their financial resources in taking
care of the orphans in their care. In the Eastern region, it
was reported that Fridays and Sundays are the ‘chilling’
days for most people.
Traditional dancing was especially reported among
participants and informants in Sekyere East district of
the Ashanti region where it was indicated that, during
moonlit nights, the youth sing, play and dance. Some

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

people dance and jump into the hands of their friends,
and this can go on throughout the night. Children who
engage themselves in these activities spend little time with
their books and do not perform well in school. Orphans
who have little or no supervision from their caregivers fall
prey to such activities and their attendant problems.
Market days

Market days were particularly reported by informants
from the Eastern region to affect orphan care because,
most caregivers who are traders would ask the children
under their care to assist them sell their goods. As a result, such children miss school at least once a week
which affects their schooling. Seven (35%) orphans interviewed indicated that they go to school three or four
times a week because they have to sell on market days
to support themselves or their caregivers.
“There is a very brilliant girl (orphan) in this school
who misses school every Wednesday and Friday,
because she has to assist her elder sister to sell
tomatoes at the market in Agomanya” (School
Teacher, Manya Krobo District).

Page 9 of 13

because churches teach their members to treat orphans
well, and even ask them to make donations towards the
care of orphans. It was however, reported that worshipping throughout the night during all night services takes
caregivers from their homes at nights and the children
under their care are left alone to cater for themselves.
This gives the young boys and girls the opportunity to
stay out of the home throughout the night, some join
friends at funeral grounds, discos and night clubs where
drinking and sexual activities go on.
Some young people who profess to be born again
Christians gather at all-night prayers and worship and
have sex afterwards. Caregivers would usually allow these
children out the whole night thinking that they are out for
prayers. Some reiterated that some pastors are involved in
sexually exploiting women and young girls especially orphans and vulnerable children.
“Some pastors use sweet words to convince the young
girls to have sex with them, impregnate them and even
infect them with HIV destroying their future” (FGD,
Men, Kumasi Metropolis).
Peer influence

“I go to school 3 times in a week because I sell toffees
in the market on market days: this I do to assist my
grandmother to take care of me” (Orphan, Manya
Krobo District).
“My grandmother who I live with is 74 years, so I have
to sell corn-dough on market days, thus I go to school
three days in a week. If I don’t sell, there will be no
money in the house for anything” (Orphan, Manya
Krobo District).
“I go to the market on Wednesdays and Fridays to sell
so I can have some money to buy food and other
things for school since my sister cannot provide for me
all the time” (Orphan, 12 years, Manya Krobo
District).
One Key Informant mentioned that some children
intentionally refuse to go to school and opt to go to the
market on market days only to meet their boyfriends and
girlfriends.
“Young girls are particularly vulnerable. On market
days, men usually target them on the market, make
friends with them, and have sex with them afterwards”
(NGO Worker, Manya Krobo District).
Church worship

About 50% of FGDs and some informants applauded
church worship as having good influence on orphan care

Peers are found wherever teenagers go, school, funeral,
night clubs, discos, and they constantly make friends.
Participants explained that teenagers learn both bad and
good behaviours from their peers. For those who find
themselves in the company of good peers, they are influenced to become good children and they are liked by
their caregivers, as such they also receive good care, but
for those who have bad friends, they are influenced to
become uncontrollable, disrespectful and ungrateful to
their caregivers. Thus the caregivers feel reluctant to
provide them with their needs.
“It is very difficult to live with a child who trusts his
friends more than you, even when you have good
intentions for him, he does not appreciate it, and
would point fingers at you as the bad one, this hurts
too much” (Caregiver, Sekyere East District).
Some caregivers are also said to be influenced by their
peers, and this affects the care they give to the orphans
they live with. Participants explained that some caregivers take instructions or suggestions from their friends
as to how they should care for the orphans and this
could be good or bad for the orphan.
Stigma and discrimination against orphans

Stigma and discrimination in the homes where orphans
live were mentioned as affecting their wellbeing because
where they exist, orphans are depressed. This affects
their school work and their participation in other social

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

activities. In the Ashanti region, it was explained that orphans are often discriminated against by their caregivers
and their children when they go wrong. Some receive severe punishment which non-orphans do not for similar offences. Orphans are regarded as poor people, and do not
deserve to use certain things in the home like a set of cutlery. Some even take different food from what the rest of
the family is taking. For example, some orphans eat waakye or koko bought from the roadside every morning,
whilst the rest of the family eats cooked food from the
home.
Participants of FGDs and informants also mentioned
that some orphans are discriminated against by their
play mates, especially when they know that the parents
died of AIDS. These orphans are accused of being
witches, which is why they have lost their parents.
“A child in our area is fond of telling an orphan they
live with not to eat with a spoon because poor people
don’t eat with cutlery, constantly reminding the
orphan that she is poor and does not have to behave
like other people whose parents can fend for
them”(FGD, Men, Kumasi Metro).
“Someone insulted the child I am taking care of that
he does not have parents, when the child did not
know, and he came home crying bitterly” (Maternal
grandmother, Sekyere East District).
“Some friends make fun of us when they have
something we don’t have, some even go to the extent of
telling us that we are the cause of our parents’ death,
so they refuse to talk to us, and that can be very
embarrassing”(FGD, Orphan, Sekyere East District).
“We are often beaten in the house, and insulted at the
least provocation” (FGD, Orphan, Sekyere East District).
In the Eastern Region, participants explained that orphans are discriminated against in the ways things are
shared in the home, for instance, food, clothing, and education. They are discriminated against as to who should
go to school amidst limited resources and who to continue
to the highest educational level possible.
“I feel so much unloved by my caregiver because she
often insults and beats me, she also gives me little
food, I’m much worried about this situation in the
home” (Orphan, Manya Krobo District).
“In Krobo land, orphans are easily identified in the
way they dress, schooling, feeding, etc. This is because
most people including caregivers complain of limited
financial and material resources, and most of what

Page 10 of 13

they have are used on their own children first before
the orphan is considered” (FGD, Adolescent Boys, Yilo
Krobo District).
“There is strong discrimination between orphans and
non-orphans. We wear old and torn uniforms the
whole year whiles our colleagues have new ones on.
We are not given enough money for feeding at school.
We do not have new clothing on occasions such as
Christmas, Easter or even for Sunday church. We are
teased by friends because we are poor and do not have
parents. We are at times exposed to very bad things in
the environment, and become confused and worried if
we feel the need for these things” (FGD, Orphans,
Manya Krobo).
Some Caregivers however, claimed that the character of
the orphan is also important in determining whether he or
she would be discriminated against or not. According to
them, some orphans are very bad and wicked children and
it is difficult for the caregiver to consider spending money
on them, especially when resources are limited.
“Whether an orphan would be discriminated in the
household or not also depends on his or her character
and the availability of resources. At times there is very
little money for the household, so the one that is
obedient and respectful is considered first” (Caregiver,
Yilo Krobo District).
Eleven out of the 20 (55%) orphans interviewed felt
that they are discriminated against physically by their
caregivers and peers, whilst the remaining felt they are
not discriminated against by anyone.
“I don’t feel discriminated against, except that I feel
I’m too poor, and that makes me uncomfortable in the
midst of my peers.” (Orphan Female 14, Manya Krobo
District).
“I don’t feel stigmatised or discriminated against by
my aunt or peers. I feel that my aunt genuinely does
not have the money to pay for my school expenses.”
(Orphan, Female, 12, Yilo Krobo District).
“I am discriminated against by my brother’s wife,
because when I need something, she will tell my brother
not to give it to me because she feels I don’t need it, but
her children are always given whatever they ask
for.”(Orphan, Male, 14, Manya Krobo District).
“I am discriminated against by my aunt, because I’m
not given what I need like school uniform. She often
beats and insults me. I sleep on cloth on the floor

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

whilst her children sleep on mattresses. Her children
also insult me at times.” (Orphan, Female, 13, Kumasi
Metropolis).
“I feel discriminated against by my aunt, because I am
the only one in the house who wear old clothes during
Christmas, she buys new ones for her children
claiming that their father bought the clothes for them,
yet I do all the hard work on the farm.” (Orphan,
Male, 12, Sekyere East District).
Needs of asante and krobo caregivers

Money was indicated by all 20 (100%) caregivers involved in in-depth interviews as their primary need in
carrying out their care-giving activities. Thirteen (65%)
of them mentioned jobs that would provide them with
regular monthly income as their need as well.
“With money, I can provide for the needs of these
children without any problem, but as at now, I must
say it is very difficult for us” (Caregiver, Sekyere East
District).
“I will say that we need more food, and clothing, but
what is most pressing is money, since money can buy
all that” (Caregiver, Manya Krobo District).
“I need a job to enable me earn some money, so that
life can be a little bit easier for us” (Caregiver, Kumasi
Metropolis).
For those who are HIV positive, they requested in
addition to money ‘Good Health’ to enable them take
good care of the orphans in their custody.
“My worst fear is that, if I’m no more, who will take of
the children? I need good health, I need to be strong, so I
can take care of the children, till they will be
independent” (PLWHA Caregiver, Manya Krobo
District).

Discussion
The results of the study have provided various explanations to the diverse socio-cultural determinants of orphan care in the study regions, thus, funeral rites and
excessive alcohol or drug use and their effects on the
care of orphans have been discussed further.
It is found from the study that the extravagance of funeral rites and ceremonies seems to affect the care of orphans in two ways. First, study participants indicated that
much money is spent on the dead to the neglect of the
needs of orphans and other vulnerable children. Second,
the celebration of funerals is so elaborate that time for
supervision and guidance of children is compromised,

Page 11 of 13

thus, providing opportunity for misdemeanour during the
period when death is being celebrated. People from both
the Ashanti and Eastern regions of Ghana organize funeral
rites in the form of ritual observations as the hallmark of
the personhood of the individuals both in this world and
in the world of the ancestors and spirits. Hence, as noted
from field notes the Asante, for instance go through about
five phases of funeral rites and ceremonies that are carefully and routinely followed.
Study participants revealed that huge sums of money are
usually spent, much of which are borrowed with high interest rates and this makes life difficult for orphans and their
caregivers. In Asante funeral rites and ceremony, some deceased persons are even preserved in the mortuary for an
extensive periods for the family to gather enough resources
to enable them organize big funeral functions. These public
functions provide the occasion for drunkenness, loss of
working hours, and opportunities for immoral behaviours.
Some Christian leaders of the Kumasi Metropolis recognized the negative effects of how Asante funerals are organised and celebrated, and, in a pastoral letter signed in
1972 by the hierarchies of the Roman Catholic, Anglican,
Methodist, AME Zion, and the Seventh-Day Adventist
churches expressed grave concerns on the conduct of funeral rites in the Kumasi metropolis. The leaders noted
that funerals had (i) assumed unnecessary proportions
with high and indiscriminate use of alcoholic drinks which
precipitated drunkenness, vices, quarrels, and fights; (ii)
that neither the bereaved family nor sympathizers who donate money benefit from the expensive funerals. Without
casting aspersions on funerals, the ministers were of the
opinion that anything that is done in strict accordance
with custom should not be tampered with provided that
such a thing is not at variance with the Christian faith and
good morality. They expressed further that they were
aware of how much store the Ghanaian, and especially the
individual who hails from the Ashanti region, lays by the
funerals of his forbears, and indicated their appreciation
and admiration for that. They therefore contended that
the unbridled use of alcoholic drinks at funerals and the
huge expenditures that have come to be inseparably associated with funerals these days, are not customary, and
militate against traditional values.
Almost four decades after that letter was circulated in
most communities in the Ashanti region, the problems
of Asante funeral rites and ceremonies have gone beyond mere concerns over overwhelming expenditures
and alcohol consumption. It has come to the notice of
the Asantehene Otumfuo Osei Tutu II the negative
impact of the manner in which Asante funerals are organized, and he has thus recently passed a ban on wakekeeping in Asante Kingdom. The effect of this is yet to
be realised since the extravagant nature of Asante funerals still persists.

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

The situation is not too different from the Eastern region
as indicated by participants. Modern Ghanaian funerals are
therefore characterized by expensive preservations of
corpses for prolonged periods, hiring of expensive hearses,
elaborate customary rites, catered food, purchasing of fanciful funeral clothing, performances by musical groups, expensive custom-made caskets, and other related items and
activities. The effect of this can only be detrimental to the
future and wellbeing of orphans.
The effects of alcohol abuse were mentioned in all
FGDs, and by most informants involved in the study. As
indicated by participants of the study, apart from having
economic implications on families and households where
the head is an alcoholic or drug addict, excessive alcohol
use by parents or caregivers also has certain social implications that can affect the future of children. Seven main
aspects of family life that can be marred by alcohol misuse
are identified as roles, routines, social life, communication,
finances, conflicts and rituals [16].
It can be inferred from the study that problematic alcohol use by caregivers can affect the quality of their
care-giving activities. This is because a caregiver who
drinks may be inconsistent, emotionally unavailable, and
unpredictable which can lead to passive neglect, and
cruel care-giving. Children under such caregivers are not
supported, nurtured or supervised [17]. Some children
are even deprived of their childhood as they take on responsibilities that are beyond their age in the form of
taking care of a sibling or a drunk parent or guardian,
thus impairing their education and peer relationships, as
they are also unable to flow with their friends as much
as they should [18].
As indicated by some FGD participants in the Ashanti
region, children under the care of parents or caregivers
who have problem with alcohol or substance misuse go
through emotional problems and this affects child–parent attachment throughout their life cycle [19]. Evidence
also exists that children of problem drinking parents
have higher levels of a range of problems than children
of non-problem drinkers, and children of parents with
other problems. The factors that could increase the likelihood of children being adversely affected include parental disharmony, violence, both parents drinking
problematically, and the drinking taking place within the
family home [20].
Some studies have also found links between domestic
violence and alcohol consumption which is usually perpetrated by men against women [21]. A study on social
work with families in which parents misuse drugs or alcohol found that alcohol misuse to be strongly associated with violence in the home [22]. The impact of
domestic violence on children is often manifest in damage to family attachment, aggression or withdrawal, sleep
problems, fear and a wish for safety [23]. By implication,

Page 12 of 13

a combination of a parent who has a problem with alcohol
and who also suffers or perpetrates violence will exacerbate the harm and risk children face. Studies have also
shown that some women resort to drinking alcohol to offset the impact of domestic violence on them [24-26].
Alcohol is noted to play a part in about 25% of known
cases of child abuse [27]. Further, some research suggests that children are more likely to suffer physical
abuse if the father is the drinker, and are more likely to
suffer neglect if the mother is the drinker [17]. Thus orphans who live with alcoholic caregivers may be at risk
from such violent and abusive behaviour, which may impact heavily on the orphans’ behaviour as they grow up.
The resultant impact of alcoholic parents or caregivers
on children and for that matter orphans has been grouped
into three, namely, (i) emotional problems; (ii) the school
environment; and (iii) anti-social behaviour [16]. Emotional problems consist of a wide range of psychosomatic
problems from asthma to bedwetting, negative attitudes to
their parents and themselves, high levels of self-blame,
withdrawal and depression. Problems associated with the
school environment include learning difficulties, reading
retardation, loss of concentration, generally poor school
performance, aggression and truancy, whilst anti-social behaviour is manifested as increased risk of aggressive behaviour towards others, hyperactivity and other forms of
conduct disorder. The researcher stated in addition that
such children can have poor development of trust as
found in this study (resulting from false accusations to
abuse), problems with making and sustaining friendships,
being a victim or witnessing conflict or violence, and verbal or physical aggression among others which do not
auger well for the wellbeing of children and orphans.
Limitation of study

The results of this study were specifically on orphans in
the study area and may not be generalised to all children
orphaned by AIDS. Also, the small numbers of children
orphaned by AIDS and caregivers involved in the study
place limitation on generalisation of findings to all children orphaned by AIDS in Ghana. Additionally, the
plight of general orphans is unknown and this makes
comparison of the plight of children orphaned by AIDS
with that of general orphans difficult.

Conclusion
The cultural practices found in the study to impact on
the care of orphans included funerals, marriages, and
naming ceremonies; traditional rituals such as puberty
rites and festivals; and traditional norms like inheritance,
and polygyny. The social factors, practices and activities
found to influence the care of orphans were: stigma and
discrimination, alcohol, tobacco/drugs, social eating/
drinking, extravagant living, fashion, sports and games,

Yarney et al. BMC Public Health (2015) 15:6

films, video, and drama, night clubs and discos, traditional dance, market days, church worship, and peer influence. Most of these socio-cultural factors compete
with orphan care for limited time and finance.
Socio-cultural patterns of life, such as funeral rites, puberty rites, festivals, inheritance, naming ceremonies, traditional dancing, among others, as found in the study are
institutional and are passed on from generation to generation. As such, they are strongly cherished and allegiance
to some of them is sometimes renewed regularly through
the performance of rituals and rites. However, some of
these patterns are found to negatively affect the care of orphans and children in general. Policies on interventions
should therefore seek to make these practices safe and
minimise their effects on orphan care.
Competing interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interest including financial
to report.
Author’s contributions
LY: Conceived study, concept formulation, questionnaire administration and
drafting of script. CM: Drafting of script. EA: Drafting of script. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Author details
School of Public Health, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana. 2Association of
African Universities, Accra, Ghana.

Page 13 of 13

14. Asiimwe D, Kibombo R, Neena S. Focus group discussions on social and
cultural factors impacting on HIV/AIDS in Uganda, Final Report. Kampala:
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development/UNDP; 2003.
15. Osei K. A handbook on Asante culture. Kumasi: Cita Press Ltd; 2002.
16. Velleman R. Alcohol and the family. London: Institute of Alcohol Studies; 1993.
17. Cleaver H, Unell I, Aldgate J. Children’s needs-parenting capacity: The impact of parental mental illness, problem alcohol and drug use, and domestic
violence on children’s development. London: The Stationary Office; 1999.
18. Velleman R. The Children of problem drinking parents: An executive
summary. Executive Summary Series, Centre for Research on Drug and
Health Behaviour, vol. 70. 2002. p. 1–5.
19. Kroll B, Taylor A. Parental substance misuse and child welfare. London:
Jessica Kingsley Publishers; 2003.
20. Eurocare/Coface. Alcohol problems in the family: A report to the European
Union. St Ives, Cambridgeshire: Eurocare; 1998.
21. Simmons J, Dodd T. Crime in England and Wales. London: Home Office
Research, Development and Statistics Directorate; 2002.
22. Harwin J, Forrester D. Parental substance misuse and child welfare: outcomes
for children two years after referral. Br J Soc Work. 2008;38:1518–35.
23. Mullender A, Hague G, Imam U, Kelly L, Malos E, Regan L. Children’s
perspectives on domestic violence. London: Sage; 2002.
24. Cantrell LA. Alcohol and family violence. Cheyenne, Wyoming: Department
of Health and Social Services; 1986.
25. Corbin WR, Bernat JA, Calhoun KS, McNair LD, Seals KL. The role of alcohol
expectancies and alcohol consumption among sexually victimized and
non-victimized college women. J Interpers Violence. 2001;16(4):297–311.
26. Downs WR, Miller BA, Panek DE. Differential Patterns of partner-to-woman
violence: a comparison of samples of community, alcohol-abusing, and
battered women. J Fam Violence. 1993;8(2):113–35.
27. Robinson W, Hassell J. Alcohol problems and the family: From stigma to
solution. London: ARP and NSPCC; 2000.

1

Received: 20 February 2013 Accepted: 22 December 2014

References
1. Ghana AIDS Commission/UNDP. A study of the status of AIDS orphans and
vulnerable children in Ghana: Towards the formulation of national policy. 2003.
2. Hunter S, Williamson J. Responding to the needs of children orphaned by
HIV/AIDS. Discussion paper on HIV/AIDS care and support, No. 7, Health and
Technical Services (HTS) Project for USAID no. 7. 1998.
3. Gilborn LZ, Nyonnyintono R, Kabumbuli R, Jagwe-Wadda G. Making a
difference for children affected by AIDS: Baseline findings from operations
research in Uganda. New York: The Population Council Inc.; 2001.
4. Nyambedha EK, Wandibba S, Aagaard-Hansen J. Changing patterns of
orphan care due to the HIV epidemic in western Kenya. Soc Sci Med.
2003;57(2):301–11.
5. Safman RM. Assessing the impact of orphanhood on Thai children affected
by AIDS and their caregivers. AIDS Care 2004. 2004;16(1):11–9.
6. Monasch R, Boerma JT. Orphanhood and childcare patterns in Sub-Saharan
Africa: An analysis of national surveys from 40 countries. AIDS. 2004;18(2):55–65.
7. Oleke C, Blystad A, Rekdal OB. “When the obvious brother is not there”:
Political and cultural contexts of the orphan Challenge in northern Uganda.
Soc Sci Med. 2005;61:2628–38.
8. Cluver L, Gardner F, Operario D. Psychological distress amongst AIDSorphaned children in urban South Africa. J Child Psychology Psychiatry.
2007;2007(48):755–63.
9. Nyamukapa C, Gregson S. Extended families and women’s roles in
safeguarding orphans’ education in AIDS-afflicted rural Zimbabwe. Soc Sci
Medicine. 2005;60:2155–67.
10. Yarney L, Mba C, Asampong E, Darko J, Yarney J. Is Inheritance System a
Factor in the Care of AIDS Orphans? The Asante and Krobo of Ghana
Scenario. Mathematica Aeterna. 2012;2(9):735–59.
11. Zimmerman B. Orphan living situations in Malawi: A comparison of
orphanages and foster homes. Rev Pol Res. 2005;22(6):881–917.
12. Sarker MC, Neckermann C, Muller O. Assessing the health status of young AIDS
and other orphans in Kampala, Uganda. Trop Med Int Health. 2005;10(3):210–5.
13. Makame VC, Ani S, Grahantham-McGregor S. Psychological well-being of
orphans in Dar El Salaam, Tanzania. Acta Paediatr. 2002;91(4):459–65.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of:
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

