Transylv. Rev. Syst. Ecol. Res. 21.3 (2019), "The Wetlands Diversity"

95

A RETURN TO THE GHANAIAN CULTURAL VALUES OF CLOSED
FISHING SEASON IN GHANA’S ARTISANAL MARINE FISHING: AN
ESSENTIAL MEANS OF RESTORING SMALL PELAGIC FISH STOCKS
Dickson ADOM *, Paul Appiah SEKYERE ** and Lily YARNEY ***
* Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Department of Educational Innovations in
Science and Technology, P. O. Box NT 1, Kumasi, Ghana, adomdick2@gmail.com
** Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Department of Chemistry, P. O. Box NT 1,
Kumasi, Ghana, ksekyerepaul@gmail.com
*** University of Ghana Business School, Department of Public Administration and Health Services
Management, Ghana, P. O. Box LG 78, Legon-Accra, Ghana, babyaraba95@yahoo.com
DOI: 10.2478/trser-2019-0020

KEYWORDS: closed fishing season, Ghanaian cultural values, artisanal marine
fishing, small pelagic fish, fish sustainability.
ABSTRACT
Closed fishing season for artisanal and inshore fishing is an effective management
measure for restoring the fish stock. The study aimed at assessing the impacts of the closed
fishing season observed in the Sekondi harbour in Ghana. The findings revealed that the one
month closure period was too short and/or lack of strict supervision to realize any significant
change in fish population and sizes. A more transparent discussion on the period for the
closure, longer closure period up to three months as well as provision of alternative sources of
livelihood were suggested to ensure more cooperation from the fisher folks.
RÉSUMÉ: Un retour sur les valeurs culturelles Ghanéennes de la saison de pèche
fermée dans la pèche marine artisanal du Ghana: Un but essentiel pour la restauration des
petits bancs de poisson pélagique.
Les saisons de pèche fermée pour la pèche côtière artisanal est une mesure efficace
pour la restauration des bancs de poissons. L’étude avait pour but d’évaluer lʼimpact de la
saison de pèche fermée dans le port de Sekondi au Ghana. Les résultats ont démontrés quʼun
mois de fermeture de la pèche était trop court et/ou manquait dʼune supervision stricte pour
réaliser un changement important dans la taille et la population des poissons. Une discussion
plus transparente sur la période de fermeture de la pèche, une période de fermeture plus longue
de trois mois comme la disposition d'alternatives pour des moyens de subsistances ont été
suggérés pour assurer une meilleure coopération avec les pécheurs locaux.
REZUMAT: O reîntoarcere la valorile culturale ghaneze ale sezonului închis de
pescuit în sezonul de pescuit ghanez artizanal: un mijloc esenţial pentru restaurarea stocurilor
de peşti pelagici.
Sezonul de pescuit închis pentru pescuit artizanal costier este o măsură de management
efectiv pentru refacerea stocurilor de peşti. Studiul a urmărit evaluarea impactului sezonului de
pescuit închis observat în portul Sekondi din Ghana. Rezultatele au relevat că perioada de
închidere de o lună a fost prea scurtă şi/sau lipsa unei supravegheri stricte pentru a realiza orice
schimbare semnificativă a populaţiei şi dimensiunilor peştilor. O discuţie transparentă privind
o perioadă de închidere mai lungă de până la trei luni, precum şi la furnizarea de surse de trai
alternative au fost sugerate pentru a se asigura mai multă cooperare din partea pescarilor.

96

D. Adom et al. – Restoring small pelagic fish stocks in Ghana (95 ~ 110)

INTRODUCTION
The fisheries resources of Ghana have long been a pillar of the national economy,
contributing significantly to socio-economic development (Adom, 2018a). The fisheries sector
generates over US$1 billion in revenue each year and accounts for at least 4.5% of Ghana’s
Gross Domestic Product (Dogbevi, 2015). With a marine coastline of five hundred and fifty
(550) kilometres stretching from Aflao in the East to Half Assini in the West, the fishing
industry plays a major role in sustainable livelihoods and poverty reduction in several
households and communities (Mensah, 2009).
The sector also provides livelihood for an estimated 10% of the population
representing about 2.5 million people who are employed directly or indirectly including
their dependents. Significantly, fish constitutes 60% of the animal protein consumed in
Ghana (Fisheries Management Plan of Ghana Marine Fisheries Sector 2015-2019). In the
area of food security, fish is recognised as the most important source of animal protein
in Ghana and is consumed by most people in all regions of the country from the rural poor
to the urban rich. The role of the sector in terms of poverty reduction is very important.
Many people rely on the fisheries sector either directly or indirectly for their livelihoods.
Post-harvest fisheries activities clearly provide a wide range of full-time and
seasonal livelihood opportunities to many vulnerable people. Employment in fishing
and aquaculture has grown rapidly over the past few decades, increasing more than
threefold from 13 million people in 1970 to over 41 million in 2004. Employment in
the fisheries sector has grown more rapidly than both world population and employment
in agriculture (Fig. 1). Most of this growth is in Asia, where over 85 percent of the
world’s fisher folk live, and is largely due to the expansion of aquaculture in this period
(FAO, 2006; FAO, 1999).

Figure 1: Employment in fisheries and aquaculture
Source: FAO (2006).
Millions of women in developing countries are employed in fisheries and
aquaculture, participating at all stages in both commercial and artisanal fisheries, though
most heavily in fish processing and marketing. In capture fisheries, women are
commonly involved in making and repairing nets, baskets and pots, baiting hooks, setting
traps and nets, fishing from small boats and canoes (Cambria, 2016). Greater percentage

Transylv. Rev. Syst. Ecol. Res. 21.3 (2019), "The Wetlands Diversity"

97

of fish production is for export, around 40% of the global production being
traded internationally, and exports from developing countries accounting for some 60% of
this (Delgado et al., 2003). Human exploitation of fish and other aquatic animals such
as crustaceans and mammals is virtually ubiquitous on Earth and since ancient times
has provided humanity with food, income and other social goods such as recreation
(Arlinghaus and Cooke, 2009). The fisheries sector provides a wide range of employment
opportunities for many in the community. These are the fish harvesters, processors, traders,
post-stick cutters, pot makers, boat builders, net makers, and ice suppliers. People also earn
money by scaling and gutting fish.
Unfortunately, trawl surveys in Ghanaian fishing communities closer to the shores
of the Gulf of Guinea show great decline in fish stock close to at least 50% (Afrolnews,
2004). USAID (2016) reports indicate that over a decade, the total marine fish
landings declined while fishing effort continues to increase, and thus catch per unit of
effort is getting lower, and sizes of landed fish are diminishing – a clear case of
growth overfishing (Abreu et al., 2016). Scientific evidence has consistently shown
that Ghana’s marine fisheries are in crisis, with a decline in fish landings over the last
decade. The European Union in 2013 warned Ghana by given her a yellow card for lack
of legislative effort to fight unregulated fishing (Thiago and Mensah, 2014). There has
also been weak enforcement and noncompliance with the fishery management measures.
Reversing the trend of stock depletion to ensure food security for the present and future
generations require bold and immediate policy and management actions (Fisheries
Management Plan of Ghana Marine Fisheries Sector, 2015-2019). It is therefore, imperative
to develop a strategic framework to terminate a further decline and rebuild the fish
stocks through closed season fishing. There is little theoretical justification for seasonal
closures in most instances. Temporal or seasonal closures may have both direct and
indirect effect (Jim and Mark, 2007).
Overly depleted species have avoided apparent extinction due to seasonal closures
is among the direct effects. Indirect effects resulting from proper application of closed
seasonal fishing is that it protects resources that are vulnerable, causing improvement
in economic returns when the market or resource conditions are poor, and restrict
harvest during seasonal toxicity or unpalatability of some species (Casey and Myers,
1998). Seasonal fishery closures are commonly used in fisheries management for
various purposes, including limitation of effort, protection of spawners, and maximization
of the yield or value that can be obtained from a cohort (Watson et al., 1993).
More specifically, closed seasons are often imposed during the breeding period of the
targeted species in the belief that this will increase reproductive success (Arendse et al.,
2007). Its purpose is to reduce catching power and fishing mortality by limiting the amount
of fishing to a desired level, which would then supposedly increase stock size (Anderson,
2004).
The principle is based on biological returns, potential, allowing fish to reproduce
during the breeding season before they are harvested (USAID, 2016).
Biologists have supported spawning area closures only to the extent that they have
contributed to reduction of exploitation rate (Halliday, 1988).

98

D. Adom et al. – Restoring small pelagic fish stocks in Ghana (95 ~ 110)

There are many instances around the world where the implementation of a closed
season has resulted in an increase of yield and higher economic returns to the fishing sector. In
the U.S.A., almost all current fisheries management plans include a form of closed fishing
season for commercial or recreational fisheries or both. For example, a closed season for
Tautogaonitis, a slow growing demersal species, in 2001 in Narragansett Bay in Rhode Island,
USA for two months during spawning season. The stock recovered in 2012, with the full
rebuilding of the stock projected to be realized by 2016 (Rhode Island Division of Fish and
Wildlife, 2015). In Senegal, a two-month seasonal closure in 2010 for octopus, has provided
an approximately 35% increase in yield, and allowed the rebuilding of the stock to sustainable
levels. Arendse et al., 2007 has reported that the frequent application of closed seasons to
species that are not disturbed by harvesting and do not aggregate to breed is therefore generally
invalid, despite wide belief that it improves reproductive successes. Seasonal closures have
numerous documented failures, particularly when used as the only management strategy in a
fishery (Jim and Mark, 2007). The most notable failures have been in large temperate fisheries,
such as in the Pacific Halibut fishery and in the ground fish fishery off the New England coast
(Sinclair and Valdimarsson, 2003). Seasonal closures are not deemed very effective and
therefore alternative strategies are being implemented in which alternatives were more
beneficial in the protection of threatened and endangered species (Federal Register, 2004).
Culturally, Ghana has a culture for closed seasons for fishing shrouded in traditional beliefs
(Adom, 2018b). These closure seasons are termed as nnabone, believed by societal members to
be days when the ancestors are purported to perform some events in and around the shores of
seas and rivers over some timelines (Adom, 2016) from 1st August to 1st December every year
(Adom, 2018b). Interestingly, the fishing closure period coincided with the times when the
fishes laid their eggs and/or nursed their young ones (Boateng, 1998). The period allowed
considerable time for the fishes to regain their population through breeding and feeding.
Watson et al. (1993) concurs that the duration for the fishing closure also affects the yield. He
argued that a six-month closure starting from December or January could increase the value of
the fishery by 5-10%, compared with a fishery with the same fishing pattern and no closure.
However, there seems to be a cessation of the traditional cultural seasonal closure for fishing
which was stipulated for longer periods of time in Ghana. Recently, the Ghana Ministry of
Fisheries and Aquaculture announced a seasonal ban on fishing activities for a period of one
month between the 15th of May to the 15th of June 2019. The ban has raised mixed feelings
among the stakeholders in the fishing industry in Ghana. The preliminary research conducted
by the researchers at in some fishing communities revealed that some fisher folks think the
cessation of fishing for some period was not necessary as it stifled their economic gains during
the fallow period. Others felt it was important as it would raise their yield eventually during
the open season. Still, others felt that the period was too short to realize any significant
increase in fish yield. Some of the workers at the Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture
strongly felt that a revitalisation of the traditional culture of fishing closures for two to three
months would increase field yield and restore the constant dwindling in the population of
fishes in Ghana. The traditional authorities felt same but insisted that alternative sources of
livelihood to support their poor fisherfolks. Therefore, this study was undertaken to assess the
impacts of the closed fishing season of small pelagic fish stock observed within the period of
15th May 2019 to 15th June 2019 in the Albert Bosumtwi fishing harbour in Sekondi, Western
Region of Ghana. The study was worth undertaking to help increase the fish stock for the small
pelagic fish which is now in low population due to overfishing activities in Ghana. It would
also help regulate the fishing closure seasons in Ghana so that the Ministry of Fisheries and
Aquaculture Development could formulate resilient policies on fishing closures in the country.

Transylv. Rev. Syst. Ecol. Res. 21.3 (2019), "The Wetlands Diversity"

99

MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study was a phenomenological study rooted in the field of cultural anthropology at
Sekondi-Takoradi in the Western Region, Southern Ghana. The study was carried out over a
five month period before and after the seasonal fishing closure from April 2019 to August
2019. The study was hinged in the qualitative research approach owing to the socio-cultural
context (Denzin and Lincoln, 1994; Fraenkel et al., 2012) within which it was situated as well
as its interactive nature. Private interviews, focus group discussions and participant-observant
method of observation were used for the ganering of the data for the study. These data
collection instruments have been proven to be efficient in Cultural Anthropology studies in
soliciting for rich data on varying topics of investigation (Leedy and Ormrod, 2010). To
prevent social desirability response set, the informants were told of the purpose of the study
(Leedy and Ormrod 2010). Names of the participants were not inquired. However, pseudoidentification that allows anonymity of particpants was used. The responses of the participants
were coded and used in describing their views expressed in this paper.
The main objective of the researchers was to seek for more enlightenment on how the
seemingly short closed season affected fishing stock and the fishing activity as a whole to
suggest proactive ways of using this cultural closed season arrangement to boost the fishing
population of small pelagic fish, the phenomenology research method was used (Pietkiewicz
and Smith, 2014). Long participant engagement through lengthy interviews conducted by the
researchers aided in capturing the thoughts of the participants comprehensively (Creswell,
2009). Purposive sampling was used in deliberately selecting the various categories of
participants who were seen as key stakeholders in the fishing industry in Sekondi (Fraenkel et
al., 2012) as well as those who knew the cultural values associated with the practice of closed
fishing season amongst the people. They included fisher folks, fish mongers and traders,
traditional authorities, workers at the Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development
(MOFAD), as well as elderly residents from the age of 50 in Sekondi totalling a sample size of
51 out of the estimated 130 participants. Apart from the fishing leader of Sekondi, leading
members of the fishing groups as well as the priests and chiefs of the sea, the other members
interviewed were selected randomly. The Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA) was
used for analyzing the final rich data on the phenomena studied from the respondents. Thick
quotations from the responses of informants were used in constructing the meanings of the
data generated (Fade, 2004; Smith and Osborn, 2008; Pietkiewicz and Smith, 2014).

Figure 2: Map of Sekondi-Takoradi (study area).

100

D. Adom et al. – Restoring small pelagic fish stocks in Ghana (95 ~ 110)

Table 1: Breakdown of interviewees; researchersʼ construct from field survey, 2019.
Total number
Details
No.
Category of interviewees
selected
1.
Leaders of fishing groups
5
They were selected purposively and
interviewed privately.
2.
Fish mongers and traders
18
They were selected randomly and
interviewed in three focus group
discussions.
3.
Traditional chiefs
2
They were selected purposively and
interviewed privately.
4.
Traditional priest
1
He was selected purposively and
interviewed privately.
5.
Elderly residents
9
They were selected randomly and
(50 years and above)
interviewed in six different focus
group discussions.
Young residents
8
They were selected randomly and
(below 25 years)
interviewed in two focus group
discussions.
6.
Workers at the MOFAD
8
They were selected randomly and
interviewed in two focus group
discussions.
TOTAL SAMPLE
51
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT AREA
Sekondi-Takoradi is the fourth most populated metropolitan area in Ghana, the
largest city and capital of the Western Region of Ghana and the hub for industrial
and commercial activities with a population of close to six hundred thousand
(Sekondi-Takoradi Metropolitan Assembly, 2017). The Dutch and the British built ports
in Sekondi in the 17th Century that were destroyed by the Ahanta people in the
Western Region (Ghana Web, 2019). Sekondi covers a land area of 219 km2 and its
the adminstrative headquarters of the Sekondi-Takoradi Metropolitan Assembly
(STMA, 2017). It is located just 280 kilometres away from La Cote d’voire border to the
West. The coastlines of Sekondi-Takoradi are fringed with coconut trees along the
sandy beaches. The vegetation is both evergreen and moist semi-deciduous forest types rich
in timber species.
The Albert Bosomtwi Sam Fishing Harbour was commissioned on the 2nd of June
1999 by the former president of Ghana Rawlings J. J. The harbour has a 200 m long
breakwater and a 76 m long jetty with two wharfs for inshore vessels, an ice-making plant, ice
storage unit, a shed for fish handling, water supply system and a fire fighting system
(GhanaWeb, 1999).
As a fishing community, the main occupation in Sekondi is fishing with a larger
section of the women engaged in staple crop production mainly for subsistance consumption.
Though majority of the women do not engage directly in the fishing activity, they rather trade
in the smoking and selling of the fish at the shores as fish mongers to market women to be sold
in the markets.

Transylv. Rev. Syst. Ecol. Res. 21.3 (2019), "The Wetlands Diversity"

101

RESULTS AND DISCUSION
The findings presented and discussed under this section focuses on the main
objectives of the study that aimed at assessing the benefits, challanges and suggestions for
improving the seasonal closure for fishing among artisanal fisher-folks observed from May 15
to June 15 2019 at the fishing communities in the Sekondi Fishing Harbour in the Western
Region of Ghana.
Wider publicity and proper consultation versus short notice and poor
consultation on seasonal closure for fishing
Interviews with the older fisher-folks (all twelve of them, including the
traditional chiefs and traditional priest) revealed that in the olden days when seasonal
closures for fishing were cultural prohibitions, every member of the society knew of it
due to their wider publicity and consultation. One of the traditional chief
interviewed mentioned that it was a communal consultation. He told the researchers: A
general community meeting was convened after prior information had been given. The
traditional priest and his cabinet of elders discuss the closure period with the members of
the society as well as the sanctions for breacking it. This included spiritual and
physical punishments. These sanctions assisted the fisherfolks in making prior
arrangements for alternative sources of livelihood before the closure period. (TC1, Personal
Communication, 20th May, 2019).
The elderly fisherfolks, twenty out of the total twenty three, told the researchers
in a focus group discussion that many of them engaged in farming activities during the
closure period to cater for their families. They added that others also followed
building contractors to work on their building projects to earn money to cater for
themselves and their families. However, many of the fisherfolks interviewed admitted
that they were not well informed of the May 15 to June 15 closure on fishing activities.
In separate focus group discussions with the researchers, some of them admitted: We
were
given a short notice of the closure. Many of us did not make any plans on how to
engage in other businesses to cater for our families. We had gone for loan facilities to
engage in business during the closure period only to be told just two weeks to the
closure period that there will be a ban on fishing. This specific situation has left many
of us impoverished and in great debt (FF-1-FGD, Personal Communication, 18th May,
2019).
A section of the elderly fisherfolks (nine out of the 23) told the researchers that
they had to ask their wards to stop schooling for the closure period because they couldn’t
fend for their schooling expenses due to the short notice of the fishing closure period.
Eight young people interviewed expressed that they were at the receiving end of the
economic hardship that came as a result of the unpreparedness of their fathers who are
fisher-folks toward the seasonal closure for fishing. Three out of the eight said that they
had to stop schooling for the half of the remaining semester because of failure on the

102

D. Adom et al. – Restoring small pelagic fish stocks in Ghana (95 ~ 110)

part of their fathers to pay for their school fees. Six out of the eight said that they had
to engage in short term trading (selling items) and engaging in constructional activities
and/or farming activities to support their families financially. These comments show that
when wider publicity of seasonal closures are not given before their implementation,
fisher-folks fail to make prior arrangements toward seasonal closures resulting in dire
consequences.
Focus group discussions with eight workers at the Ministry of Fisheries and
Aquaculture Development revealed that a year-long notice of the seasonal closure was given
the fisher-folks before the implementation. They told the researchers of the then intention of
the Ministry to observe the seasonal closure in 2018 but was resisted by the fishing
communities and unions, claiming they were not reliably informed. The Ministry then called
off the August 7th 2018 seasonal closure on fishing. The ministry then asked the fisher folks
in several consulations to come out with new dates for the closure in 2019, of which they
proposed the May 15 to June 15. They added that: The fisher-folks don’t want to observe any
seasonal closure for their fishing activities and thus came out with this date with the
expectation that the ministry would ignore it. But, to their dismay, the ministry accepted it.
Now, they are coming out with a false allegation that they were given a short notice and were
not consulted’ (MOFAD-FGD-1, Personal Communication, 20th May, 2019).
The views of the workers of MOFAD are justified in a news report by Joy FM in
Ghana on the 10th of April, 2019 titled “Was the Fisheries Ministry coerced into accepting
May 15 closed season?” Abubakar Ibrahim, one of their news reporters interviewed the sector
minister, Hon. Elizabeth Afoley Quaye who shared similar views that the dates were given by
the fisher-folks after extensive consultations with them. Thus, it would not be fair for the
fisher-folks in the Sekondi Fishing Harbour to blame the ministry for not giving them more
time to plan for the seasonal closure. The two traditional chiefs interviewed confirmed the
position of the workers at MOFAD, concurring that the fisher-folks were well informed ahead
of the time for the seasonal closure they proposed. Their lack of preparedness, according to the
workers at MOFAD and the traditional chiefs was as a result of their expectation that the
ministry would call off the seasonal closure since the timing was not within the dates the
ministry endorsed. Judging from the larger section of the fisher-folks at the grassroot sharing
the view of the short notice of the closure may suggest that the leaders of their fishing groups
probably did not inform them earlier at the local level. There is still the need for greater
education on the seasonal closure for fishing among the fisher-folks as many of them
expressed negative views about it, having no knowledge about the benefits of the seasonal
closures to fishing. The discretion of those who are relied upon to implement policy in the
field is a key factor in its successful implementation (Burke et al., 2012).
The bottom-up theorists believe that centralized decision-making adapted to local
conditions and flexibility is important to reach goals. This approach enhances democratic
accountability and the ability of policy leaders to structure local behaviors (Landry, 2017).
Therefore, the fisheries ministry must put up measures in ensuring that policy information
reaches the grassroot, probably adapting the bottom-up approach in policy dissemination.

Transylv. Rev. Syst. Ecol. Res. 21.3 (2019), "The Wetlands Diversity"

103

A step towards mutual understanding between the Fisheries Ministry and the
other stakeholders in the fishing industry on appropriate periods for the seasonal
closures
The workers at MOFAD disclosed to the researchers that they initially came out
with dates for the seasonal closure on fishing which was from August 7th to September end
in 2018. The August month was appropriate because it is scientifically proven that the
popular fish stock Sardinella maderensis in Ghana’s marine waters referred to as the
“people’s fish” breeds most during the month of August (Apetorgbor, 2018). The eggs
produced by the older female fishes are bigger in size and hold greater potential of
getting fertilized. Thus, it would be best to observe the seasonal closure within this period
to allow the fishes to rest and spawn. Unfortunately, the fisher-folks revolted against
the decision, blaming the Fisheries Ministry as being autocratic. To be a listening ministry,
the sector minister asked the leaders of the fisher-folks nationwide to propose their dates
for the seasonal closure. After deliberations with their members, they came out with the
May 15th to June 15th. The post effects of the seasonal closure did not register very
significant benefits in terms of fish stock and yield as the fisher-folks admitted to
the researchers. Even before the observance of the seasonal closure date given by the
fisher-folks, their leaders came back to suggest the initial date expertly given by the
Fisheries Ministry. However, their plea was nullified because the closed season had to
be observed this year (2019). Thus, the date given by the fisher-folks which was May 15th
to June 15th was observed. After the seasonal closure in June end 2019 when the
fisher-folks were interviewed, they suggested that the 2020 seasonal closure should
be observed in the months of August and September. Some of the views they expressed
in one focus group discussion were: “The May 15th to June 15th seasonal closure did
not help us (artisanal fishers). We want it to be observed between August and September
as we have heard that the fishes spawn and increase in their sizes and numbers. We want
to get bumper harvest after the long fallow period during the seasonal closure”
(FF-2-FGD, Personal Communication, 22nd June, 2019).
The Fisheries Ministry must immediately hold a consultative forum with all
the stakeholders in the fishing industry to deliberate on the appropriate timespan for
the observance of the seasonal closure. The Fisheries Ministry, being the sector ministry
with the right expertise and mandated by law to manage the sector must well educate
the fisher-folks on the need to stick to the months that they will get greater yield of
fishes. Though they must not impose their views on the fisher-folks, they must reason
with them on the need to accept the August-September closure period. This consultative
forum must be done prior to the seasonal closure period in the following year. The
proceedings of the meeting must be well disseminated especially at the grassroots level
to the ordinary fisher-folk. This can be achieved if the Fisheries Ministry task the leaders
of the local agencies and fishing groups in the various fishing communities as well
as the traditional authorities and the local media houses to broadcast and discuss the
seasonal closure periods and its benefits to the people. This would ensure that every
stakeholder is well informed and educated so as to avert any last minute surprises and
unpreparedness.

104

D. Adom et al. – Restoring small pelagic fish stocks in Ghana (95 ~ 110)

Benefits or no benefits of the one month seasonal closure for fishing
Admittedly, a considerable number of them (46 out of the total 51 participants) told
the researchers that the one month closure was a vacation for fisher-folks to rest and for them
to mend their nets and repair their canoes. In a focus group discussion, they told the
researchers: “Many of us do not get adequate time to rest, drastically affecting our health. As
such, the one month closer gave us ample time to go on vacation from our work to have
considerable rest and relaxation” (FF-2-FGD, personal communication, 22nd June, 2019).
“Some of our colleagues are greedy and hardly spend time mending their nets and
repairing their damaged canoes because of their constant use for fishing activities. The one
month closure gave them the time to mend their torn nets that even reduced their catch at sea
as well as in repairing their canoes” (FF-3-FGD, personal communication, 23rd June, 2019).
The main benefits of closed fishing season which are to control fishing, to increase the
spawning potentials of fishes by protecting adults during the closure period and/or protect
juveniles from extinction (Beets and Manuel, 2007) were not fully realized because of poor
timing and lack of proper enforcement as noted in the responses of participants.

Figure 3: A fisher-folk at the Sekondi Harbour mending his fishing net
during the closed season source: fhotographed by the researchers.
Duration of seasonal fishing closure versus strict compliance of the ban on fishing
All the fisher-folks interviewed said after the post seasonal closure that the sizes of
fishes and their population remained the same. 18 out of 23, attributed it to the short closure
period. The leaders of the fishing groups and the traditional authorities indicated that if the
period will be longer, they will benefit by a greater fish yield and an increase in the sizes of the
pelagic fishes. The traditional authorities mentioned that, their ancestors assigned two to three
months for the seasonal closures, and suggested that collaboration between the Fisheries
Ministry and other stakeholders in the fishing industry would lead to better decisions regarding
the increase of the seasonal closure period from one month to two-three months. Examples can
be gleaned from Phillipines that observe two months seasonal closure as well as Senegal that
observes four months closure on the fishing of octopus and small pelagics with increase in fish
yield (Zaney, 2019). Guinea, Mauritania, Morrocco, U.S.A. observe closures for over a month.

Transylv. Rev. Syst. Ecol. Res. 21.3 (2019), "The Wetlands Diversity"

105

Other participants held contrary view. They said that the problem was not with
the duration for the seasonal closure but ensuring strict compliance of all the stakeholders
in the fishing industry. The leaders of the fishing groups registered their displeasure for the
weak supervision of the closed fishing season. One of them told the researchers: “Some
foreign nationals (Chinese) engage in fishing despite the ban. It seems they have support
of some of the workers at the Fisheries Ministry. If this discrimination attitude is not
halted, nothing good will come out of the seasonal closure” (FL-PI-3, personal
communication, 10th June, 2019).
Therefore, though longer time for seasonal closure observance is key to replenishing
the low stock of fishes, strict compliance to the ban must also be ensured to enjoy the full
benefits (Scheer and Moss, 2017).
Misinformation and lack of information on government fishing policies among
the ordinary fisher-folk
Ninety-eight% (22) of all the fisher-folks interviewed in this study, including four
of the leaders of the local fishing groups, were not aware of the full government policy on
the seasonal closure on fishing. They knew of only the seasonal closure on artisanal fishing.
As such, they felt that they were discriminated against because of their impoverished
state. They disclosed to the researchers that they saw many times the industrial trawlers
and tuna operators working on the sea while they were asked to observe the closed
fishing season. Some of them said to the researchers: “We see the boat fisher-folks
(industrial trawlers) and tuna operators working though all of us have been asked to
observe the seasonal closure on fishing. The authorities look on and do not prosecute
them. Some of us would also revolt against the seasonal closure and go for fishing”
(FF-2-FGD, personal communication, 21st May, 2019).
Their comments clearly show that they were not reliably informed of the
government’s policy on seasonal closures for fishing. However, the industrial trawlers
and tuna operators have different periods that they would observe their seasonal closures.
Tuna operators’ seasonal closure was from January 1st to February 30th while
industrial trawlers seasonal closure starts from August 1st to September 30th. Their
view shows clearly that education on government policies regarding fishing should
be intensified especially at the grassroots level. This is very crucial for these fisher-folks
in helping in the implementation of the policies because lack of information
and/or misinformation can propel many of them in usurping the policy directive on
seasonal closures for fishing.
Making alternative arrangements for fishermen during the seasonal closure
The government of Ghana has shown her commitment in helping fisher-folks in
their traditional business. One of such specific assistance is with the provision of subsidies
on premix fuel for artisanal fishers (Sackey-Mensah, 2012). Interview with the
fisher-folks show that they can wholeheartedly support the seasonal closure even if
it is extended to two or three months only in condition that the government would offer
them alternative sources of livelihood during the seasonal closure period. When the
researchers asked them the kind of support they would expect from the government, these
were some of the responses: “The government can support us with the setting up of cold
stores for selling fishes during the seasonal closure period to help us cater for ourselves

106

D. Adom et al. – Restoring small pelagic fish stocks in Ghana (95 ~ 110)

and our families” (FF-1-FGD, Personal Communication, 5th June, 2019). “The
government can support us with chemicals and other farming equipment to assist us in
our farming activities during the seasonal closure period” (FF-2-FGD, personal
communication, 21st May, 2019). “The government through some of the financial
agencies could offer us soft loans with low interest rates to aid us engage in
small-scale enterprises and/or trading to support ourselves and our families. Otherwise,
during the closed seasons, we will be impoverished” (FF-3-FGD, Personal Communication,
28th May, 2019). “The government should make arrangements to offer us some allowance
packages to help us fend for ourselves and our families during the seasonal closure” (FF-2FGD, Personal Communication, 21st May, 2019).
Similar sentiments were expressed by the chief fisherman of Kokrobite in the
Ga South Municipal Assembly in the Greater Accra Region of Ghana who requested
the government of Ghana to make appropriate arrangements for alternative sources
of livelihood for the fisher-folks before the implementation of the seasonal closure period
on fishing (Business News, 2018). The workers at MOFAD concurred that such specific
incentives and continuous support offered to the fisher-folks during the seasonal closure
period would help them in supporting the policy as they would not be tempted in any way
to breach the directive because of financial hardships. The demands of the fisher-folks and
the workers at MOFAD in Ghana is not misplaced because similar plea and arrangements
for alternative sources of livelihood were made for the fisher-folks in Myanmar during
their annual three months seasonal closure on fishing (Global New Light of Myanmar, 30th
May, 2019).
In thinking of the kind of alternative sources of livelihood that can be provided for
the fisher-folks, the government of Ghana can pick lessons from what other countries
are doing. For instance, in Sri Lanka, the government decided to diversify the income
generating activities of small-scale fisher households such as promoting sustainable home
gardening activities (RFLP, 2011). In addition, vocational training program on coconut oil
processing was introduced since there are large coconut plantations in Myanmar (Haritha et al.,
2013).
General challenges expressed by fisher-folks on bad fishing practices that need
immediate redress
The major concern of about 23 out of the 25 (97%) of the fisher-folks was with the
bad fishing practices that are carried out in the Albert Bosumtwi fishing harbour.
They mentioned the use of light for fishing as well as the use of deadly chemicals such
as DDT, Sodium cyanide, carbide and dynamite for fishing. Many of the fisher-folks stated
that they noticed these bad fishing practices among the foreign nationals especially the
Chinese. They said that the authorities look on as the foreign nationals engage in these
unhealthy fishing activities. Some even said it may be because the Chinese fisher-folks have
bribed the workers of MOFAD who are not applying the stricter punishments on them.
However, when their colleagues engage in these same foul practices, they immediately cease
their canoes.
When the workers of MOFAD were questioned on this, they dismissed it saying
that the sanctions were applied on both local and foreign nationals, mentioning the
prosecution of some Chinese who were found engaging in light fishing. Yet, over 50% of
the participants in the study insisted that the fisher-folks who engage in these illegal
fishing practices are not prosecuted. As a result, it is on the ascendency. One of the leaders
of the fishing groups told the researchers: “Most times when we report such incidences,
the culprits are freed because they have the support of someone in the fisheries department

Transylv. Rev. Syst. Ecol. Res. 21.3 (2019), "The Wetlands Diversity"

107

or in government. If this favouritism attitude is not erased completely in the fishing industry,
these illegal fishing practices would continue” (FL-PI-3, Personal Communication, 10th June,
2019).
Weak enforcement of fishing policies and sanctions as well as the frequent
corruption among those in authority (Scheer and Moss, 2011) has been the constant bane
behind the slow pace of development in the Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture
Development in Ghana.
The Fisheries Ministry must liaise with the security agencies in the country and
ensure the full implementation of the Regulations (10-21) of the Fisheries Regulation, 2010
(L. I. 1968) that aims at prosecuting all persons who engage in illegal, unreported
and unregulated (IUU) fishing activities such as light fishing and the use of dynamites and
poisons.
This fisheries act should be implemented to the fullest with no favour or whatsoever to
anyone including governmental officials who hide behind the screens to support fisher-folks to
engage in these unproductive activities in the fishing industry. One of the leaders of the fishing
groups told the researchers that Ghana should learn from Togo and put up stricter measures in
prosecuting all fisher-folks who engage in light fishing, aiding in completely rooting out these
bad fishing practice in the country.
The researchers were told that the fisher-folks use light to attract the fishes. Also some
fishers use the DDT and other chemicals in a bid to maximize their fish yield.
However, these practices have very dire consequences to the health of the
aquatic ecosystems, fishes, the humans that consume the fishes and on the economic gains
of the fish mongers (Curtean-Bănăduc et al., 2016). All the eighteen fish mongers and
traders interviewed said that the use of the poisonous chemicals caused the fishes to
rot speedily, few days after their catch, making them incur huge debts. Those who roast
some of the fishes (Tilapia ‒ Oreochromis niloticus) for sale said that when heat or smoke
is exposed to the fishes caught using poisonous chemicals like DDT and cyanide; they
break into pieces, negatively affecting their sales and prices. In terms of the health of
the fishes, they look discoloured with broken and sunken eyes, making their
consumption hazardous as buttressed Bentill (2014). Mak et al. (2005) mentions that
when cyanide is used for fishing, fishes suffer chronic toxicity, exposing them to stress
and damage with eventual death. In addition, the consumption of the fishes with large
quantities of DDT can cause serious havoc to the nervous system (Bentill, 2014; Afoakwa et
al., 2018).
Therefore, strict enforcement of sanctions against all forms of illegal fishing activities
must be ensured by the Fisheries Ministry in collaboration with the law enforcing agencies in
Ghana.

108

D. Adom et al. – Restoring small pelagic fish stocks in Ghana (95 ~ 110)

CONCLUSIONS
The Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development in Ghana has done well
in implementing the closed season act which has been left behind for so many years despite
it being part of the cultural fibre of the Ghanaian people. MOFAD in accordance with
sections 76(3) and 84 of the Fisheries Act 2002 (Act 625) has been able to implement
the seasonal closure for fishing in 2019 though with some considerable setbacks. This
study aimed at assessing the impacts of the closed fishing season for artisanal fishing that
was observed within the period of 15th May 2019 to 15th June 2019 in Ghana, with the
Albert Bosumtwi fishing harbour in Sekondi, Western Region of Ghana as a case study.
The study has shown that the projected benefits of the seasonal closure were not fully
realized because of the relatively shorter period of observance, the lack of strict
supervision, and the lack of effective dissemination of the government policies on the
seasonal closure. For effective implementation of the seasonal closure for fishing in
the coming years, the study contends that the Fisheries Ministry must ensure close
talks through consultative forums with all the stakeholders in the fishing industry
especially the grassroots fisher-folks so that government policies on seasonal closures
for fishing could be well disseminated. Amicable dates that would aid in increasing the
fish yield and sizes must be discussed during the consultative forums organized by
the Fisheries Ministry. Also, very strict supervision approaches must be adopted by
the Fisheries Ministry in prosecuting all fisher-folks and other persons who flout the
seasonal closure. The sanctions must be stricter to serve as deterrent for others who would
want to walk that unhealthy path. Moreover, the law enforcing agencies must assist the
Fisheries Ministry in enforcing the stricter sanctions on fisher-folks who engage in bad
fishing practices such as using light and other poisonous substances in fishing. When close
measures are taken by the Fisheries Ministry in implementing these proactive suggestions, it
would lead to better and more beneficial seasonal closure observance for artisanal fishing
activities in Ghana.

Transylv. Rev. Syst. Ecol. Res. 21.3 (2019), "The Wetlands Diversity"

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.
6.
7.
8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

109

REFERENCES
Abreu A. D., Salinas A. H. and Clusener-Godt M., 2016 ‒ Sustainable management of the lake
Bosomtwe in the Ashanti Region of Ghana, France: United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, 46.
Adom D., 2016 ‒ Asante indigenous knowledge systems: repositories of conservation ethics for
Ghana’s biodiversity, sub-Saharan academic research publications (conference paper)
(manuscript ID- UFUSokotoConf/2016/0029).
Adom D., 2018a ‒ The human impact and the aquatic biodiversity of lake Bosomtwe:
renaissance of the cultural traditions of Abono (Ghana)? Transylvanian Review of Systematical
and Ecological Research, 20, 1, 87-110.
Adom D., 2018b ‒ Traditional biodiversity conservation strategy as a complement to the existing
scientific biodiversity conservation models in Ghana, Environment and Natural Resources
Research, 8, 3, 1-24.
Anderson J. E., 2010 ‒ Public policy making-An introduction (7th edit.), Boston MA:
Wadsworth.
Anderson L. G., 2004 ‒ The economics of fisheries management, 2nd revised edition, The
Blackburn Press, Caldwell, New Jersey, 296.
Andre G. K., 2001 ‒ The Jamaica fishing industry: brief notes on its structure, socio-economic
importance and some critical management issues, 1-10.
Apetorgbor S., 2018 ‒ Closed season brief, The USAID/Ghana Sustainable Fisheries
Management Project (SFMP), Narragansett R. I.: Coastal Resources Center, Graduate School of
Oceanography, University of Rhode Island GH2014_POL109_CRC, 10.
Arendse C. J., Govender A. and Branch G. M., 2007 ‒ Are closed fishing seasons an effective
means of increasing reproductive output? doi:10.1016/j.fishres.2007.01.001.
Arlinghaus R. and Cooke S. J., 2009 ‒ Recreational fisheries: socio-economic importance,
conservation issues and management challenges, 3-58.
Bentill N. L., 2014 ‒ Danger: fishermen using DDT, carbide for fishing (General News)
www.graphic.com.gh. (Accessed 21/04/2019).
Curtean-Bănăduc A., Burcea A. and Bănăduc D., 2016 ‒ Persistent organic pollutants general
considerations, in The impact of persistent organic pollutants on freshwater ecosystems and
human health, ISBN 978-606-12-1412-9, 7-24, 152.
Pwaberi D. W., 2018 ‒ Fishermen demand allowances before closed season fishing policy, The
business news of Ghana, June 25, 2018, www.ghanaweb.com-663217.
Cambria F., 2016 ‒ The importance of fisheries and aquaculture to development, fisheries,
sustainability and development, 353-364.
Casey J. M. and Myers R. A., 1998 ‒ Near extinction of a large widely distributed fish, Science,
281, 690-692.
Delgado C., Wada N., Rosegrant M. W., Meijer S and Ahmed M., 2003 ‒ International Food
Policy Research Center. Washington DC and World Fish Center: Penang, Malaysia.
Dogbevi E., 2015 ‒ Ghana’s fisheries sector said to generate more than GH 1b annually,
http:www.gahanabusinessnews.com (Accessed 4/6/2019)
FAO, 2006 ‒ State of world fisheries and aquaculture, Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization.
FAO,
1999
‒
Number
of
fishers
doubled
since
1970
http://www.fao.org/fi/highligh/fisher/c929.asp. Accessed 25/07/19.

110

D. Adom et al. – Restoring small pelagic fish stocks in Ghana (95 ~ 110)

20.

Federal Register, 2004 ‒ Rules and regulations, 69, 64, April 2nd, Department of Commerce,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 50 CFR Part 660 (17329-17354) “Fisheries
off west coast states and in the Western Pacific; Western Pacific pelagic fisheries; pelagic long
line fishing restrictions, seasonal area closure, limit on swordfish fishing effort, gear restrictions,
and other sea turtle take mitigation measures”.
Global new light of Myanmar, 2019 ‒ Editorial, finding alternative livelihood for fishermen
during closed season is a must, May 30, http://www.myanmardigital.news (accessed 14/5/2019).
Halliday R. G., 1988 ‒ Use of seasonal spawning area closures the management of haddock
fisheries in the northwest Atlantic, NAFO Scientific Council Studies, 12, 27-36.
Haritha W., Champa A. and Claude F., 2013 ‒ Promoting non-fisheries livelihoods in smallscale fisheries communities in Sri Lanka, 1-62.
Ibrahim A., 2019 ‒ Was Fisheries Ministry coerced into accepting May 15 closed season?
http://www.myjoyonline.com (accessed 7/04/2019).
Jim B. and Mark M., 2007 ‒ Temporal and seasonal closures used in fisheries management: a
review with application to Hawaii, 1-13.
Khan A. R., 2016 ‒ Policy implementation: some aspects and issues, Journal of Community
Positive Practices, XVI, 3, 3-12.
Landry S., 2017 ‒ Policy implementation – A synthesis of the study of policy implementation
and the causes of policy failure, OCP Policy Center, policy paper, 1-26.
Mak K. K. W., Yanase H. and Renneberg R., 2005 ‒ Cyanide fishing and cyanide detection in
coral reef fish using chemical tests and biosensors, Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 20, 25812593.
Mensah C. A., 2009 ‒ Optimization of profit in the artisanal marine fishing: a case study of
second fishing harbour, A research thesis submitted to college of science, KNUST, 1-78.
Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development, 2015 ‒ Fisheries management plan of
Ghana, A national policy for the management of the marine fisheries sector, vi-48.
RFLP, 2011 ‒ Sri Lanka baseline survey report, Regional fisheries livelihoods programme for
south and southeast Asia (GCP/RAS/237/SPA), project document2011/LKA/MIC/02.
Rhode Island Division of Fish and Wildlife, 2015 ‒ Atlantic States Marine Fisheries
Commission Tautog (Tautogaonitis) stock assessment peer review report, 283.
Sackey-Mensah K., 2012 ‒ Fuel subsidy in Ghana’s marine artisanal fisheries sector,
https://www.unuftp.is/static/fellows/document/rebecca12prf.pdf (final report), (accessed
14/05/2019).
Sinclair M. and Valdimarsson G., 2003 ‒ Responsible fisheries in the marine ecosystem,
Wallingford, Cambridge: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Thiago D. and Mensah E., 2014 ‒ Modernization of the fishing vessels registry and licensing
system to enhance sustainable management of Ghana’s fisheries, Ghana: final report WARFP.
USAID, 2016 ‒ Sustainable fisheries management project, rebuilding depleted small pelagic
stocks in Ghana, Closed fishing season proposal to the Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture
Development, The Scientific and Technical Working Group, 1-12.
Watson R. A., David J. D. and Restrepo V. R., 1993 ‒ Closed seasons and tropical penaeid
fisheries: A simulation including fleet dynamics and uncertainty, North American Journal of
Fisheries Management, 13, 326-336.
Zaney G. D., 2019 ‒ Closed seasons-essential tool for reversing fish stock depletion,
https://www.ghana.gov.gh (accessed 10/06/2019)

21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

34.
35.
36.

37.

38.

