International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

85

Balancing Academia with Clinical Proficiency in the
Training of Nurses at the University Level: The Case of Ghana
Lily Yarney1, Belinda Adzimah-Yeboah2, Kwame Ameyaw Domfeh3, Anthony Q.Q. Aboagye4
1Senior Lecturer, Department of Public Administration and Health Services Management, University of Ghana

Business School, Legon, Accra, 2Assistant Lecturer, School of Nursing and Midwifery, University of Health and
Allied Health Sciences, PMB 31, Ho, 3Professor, Department of Public Administration and Health Services
Management, University of Ghana Business School, Legon, Accra, 4Professor, Department of Finance, University
of Ghana Business School, Legon, Accra

Abstract
Background: At the University level, the preparation of student nurses involves acquisition of theoretical
knowledge and clinical practice, when this is done well, it can serve as a double-edged sword for blending
theory and practice. We explored the ability, role, and experiences of nurse academics in balancing theory
and practice in training nurses.
Method: Using exploratory research with methodical triangulation design, data were collected from nursing
lecturers and student nurses using interviews, questionnaires, and focus group discussions.
Conclusion: Findings indicate that clinical practice is recognized by lecturers and students as an important
measure for enhancing theoretical preparation of nursing students. University academic calendar does not
favor inclusion of clinical practice, thus, balancing theory with clinical practice is difficult. University nurse
educators in Ghana are obligated to blend theory and practice. However, challenges are encountered in
doing so. Curricula for nursing education should be designed to be autonomous to place priority on clinical
practice. The Nursing and Midwifery Council of Ghana should also put monitoring mechanisms in place to
ensure clinical practice competencies of nursing lecturers.
Keywords: Nursing Training, Academia, Clinical Proficiency, Ghana.

Introduction
Countries all over the world including Ghana
are encouraging the transition of nursing education
from hospital-based training Registered Nurse (RN)
to a University based Degree Nurse. At this level, the
preparation of student nurses involves acquisition of
knowledge that should satisfy all the required university

Corresponding Author:
Lily Yarney
Senior Lecturer, Department of Public Administration
and Health Services Management, University of Ghana
Business School, Legon, Accra
e-mail: lyarney@ug.edu.gh
Tel: +233208137326

program courses as well as the nursing professional
theoretical courses and clinical practice requirements to
imbibe practical skills in the neophyte student.
This dual academic and professional proficiency
requires the nurse educator to impact both academic
knowledge and clinical skills to the student. In highincome-countries, the Professor of Nursing is a doubleedged sword- delivering effectively, the theoretically
required components as well as the clinical component.
Thus, ensuring that, the clinical credibility of a nurse
educator is as important as the academic laureates of a
dignified Professor.
The nurse educator in the university should
therefore be one who must be able to apply theory to
practice, and impact theoretical knowledge as well as
adequately prepare students to be clinically proficient.

86

International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

Clinical practice is a problematic component of a
nurse’s academic identity and disciplinary discourse, yet
a focus on clinical practice is central to the autonomy,
integrity, and distinctiveness of Nursing as an academic
discipline1. Nurse educators, therefore, are faced with the
responsibility of balancing the demands of academia and
professional practice, to adequately prepare students to
confidently acquire psychomotor skills for professional
licensing and future practice.
Nursing education in Ghana evolved from hospitalbased skill training in the early 1960s and later included
the University transition from the 1980s to date.2 Hence,
for the past four decades, nurse educators in Universitybased programs are expected to adequately prepare
students for professional practice and maintain their
professional credentials as they fulfil the demands of
academia, conducting research, publishing and other
University responsibilities that account for promotions
and self-development.
Presently, there are both public and private
Universities that are training nurses in Ghana, and the
university-based nursing is a four-year degree program
consisting of both theory and practicum, at the end
of which students are awarded a Bachelor’s degree
in Nursing, and are subsequently expected to write
a professional licensure examination to practice as
professional nurses.
Nurses trained at the university are expected to
contribute better to meeting the growing healthcare
demands of today’s society. Whilst this could be
considered as a positive development, one critical issue
which confronts nursing practice both in high-income
and low-and middle-income countries is the issue of
safe and quality patient care. These have always been
very important part of healthcare delivery, and it is
obvious that unsafe patient care is one situation that is
not tolerable in any society of the world.
Research from high-income countries have identified
several factors in the nursing profession that result in
unsafe patient care toinclude inadequate research on
nursing practice, low level of competency in clinical
skills, poor knowledge base and inability of nurse
educators to balance theory and practice.1Arguably, the
ability to address unsafe patient care depends largely on
the extent to which these factors are addressed.The role of
nursing services is critical in determining safety, quality,
and high performance in healthcare delivery. Among

the human resources for health, nurses always make up
most of the professional group that provide care at all
levels, and therefore, usenotable amount of operating
costs of hospitals.3 Hence, gaining an understanding
of the impact of nursing care on patients is important
in ensuring quality, safety, and patient-centered
care.4Nurses’ interaction with patients is also the main
determinant of patient satisfaction and recovery.5 Thus,
the critical role of nursing in quality and safe healthcare
requires that nurses be adequately trained both in theory
and in practice.
It is a common parlance in Ghana that nurses
who begin their training at the university level are not
clinically competent and possess inadequate nursing
skills, as they usually lack confidence and are scared
to touch patients and care for them.Anecdotal evidence
in Ghana indicates concerns over the adamant attitudes
and laxity flare exhibited by nurses in academia to
the acquisition of psychomotor skills toward clinical
practice for students, however, this is what will enable
them identify with their discipline and legitimize their
professional competency. The dual role of teaching and
clinical practice seems attractive to faculty and clinical
staff, but requires significant amount of investment of
time and money.1 Most nurse educators complain that
playing the dual role over a long period of time leads to
burnout. If nurse educators are not able to equip students
with clinical skills and students feel incompetent to
practice, the main purpose of nursing trainingwould be
defeated.
Research into bridging the theory and practice gap
has also received very little attention in Ghana, and
failure to address this gap could lead to unsafe patient
care. This can better be managed in healthcare systems
where innovative practices are promoted through
research. Additionally, there is a dearth of literature
in this area in Ghana, and the paucity of data and
subsequent lack of information has manifested in the
inability of university student nurses’ enough acquisition
of professional knowledge and skills to enable them link
theory to clinical practice, and deliver safe patient care.
We therefore sought to investigatethe responsibilities
and experiences of University nursing lecturers in
balancing teaching and clinical practice in their training
of students. Specifically, we explored the obligations,
expectations, and experiences of Nurse Educators as
teachers and as professional nurses shouldering this dual
role

International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

Theoretical and Conceptual Framework:
The Problem Based Learning(PBL) theoryis used to
explain some of the interconnections in the conceptual
framework for the study.6The PBL is characterized by a
student-centered approach, with teachers as facilitators
rather than disseminators.7In addition to emphasizing
learning by doing, PBL requires students to be metacognitively aware.8 In nursing practice, this is called
critical thinking, an approach that is used to solve client
problems. At the entry point of training, many students
are not capable of critical thinking, thus, the lecturer must
become a ‘cognitive coach’ who models for students to
emulate. PBL theory is effective in facilitating student
problem-solving and self-directed learning skills.9
Nursing is a lifelong act of solving problems, hence,
the skill can only be learnt through real life solving of
patients’ problems with theoretical knowledge base as
the pivot.

87

University nursing program as a legitimate
academic discipline must produce nurses to become
scholars, practitioners,and leaders in the discipline,
and take the lead in delivering quality and safe patient
care. These qualities of a graduate nurse is what the
nurse educator is expected to produce, it is therefore
imperative that the lecturer posse a dual competenceeducatorand practitioner (Figure 1), because, the
training of nurses ends at the bedside of the patient or
in the community.10The nurse educator’s experience
in teaching and guiding students in a clinical setting
provides a foundation for further studies and contribute
to the existing body of knowledge in nursing.11They must
thus, be equipped with all the skills to train the caliber of
nurses needed to give quality client care and legitimize
the nursing profession as an academic discipline.

Figure 1: The Graduate Nurse as a Practitioner, Scholar and Leader

Source: Authors’ construct

88

International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

Methodology
Research Design and Study Sites: The study was
exploratory with methodical triangulation in design
to neutralize biases and to ensure confidence in the
results.12,13
The study areas were schools and departments
of nursing in three Ghanaian universities, namely:
University of Ghana School of Nursing in Accra,
University of Health and Allied Sciences School
of Nursing and Midwifery in Ho, and Valley View
University (VVU), Department of Nursing in Accra.
These universities have all been involved in the training
of nurses and they were easily accessible, cooperation
from respondents and information required were
relatively easier to obtain.
University of Ghana is the oldest university among
the three and was the first to start a bachelor’s degree in
nursing in Ghana in the late 1980s. The population of
lecturers in the School of Nursing was 25 with student
population of about 1,500 at the time of the study in 2018.
Valley View University was started in the 1990s and had
10 Nursing lecturers with 250 students. University of
Health and Allied Sciences was established in 2011. The
Nursing school had a lecturer population of 15 to 1,500
students at the time of the study. All the Nursing Schools
and Departments run a bachelor’s degree program which
is a four-year program, made up of theory and clinical
practice sections. The University of Ghana School
of Nursing in addition, runs postgraduate program in
Nursing.
Study Population, Sampling, and Sample Size:
The study population was made up of university nursing
lecturers and nursing students. There were seven public
universities and few private universities that were
relatively new in Ghana at the time of the study. Among
the public universities five had schools or departments
of nursing and some of the private universities also
had degree nursing program. Two public universities
(University of Ghana and University of Health and Allied
Sciences) and one private university were purposefully
sampled for the study.
The total number of nursing lecturers and students
involved in the quantitative study was 80. Stoker
Guideline for Sampling Table was utilized to randomly
select 30 lecturers and 50 level 400 students who have
gone through the full cycle of a university nursing
training program and were being prepared for graduation

and licensure examination.
For the qualitative study,purposive sampling was
employed. The authors used their knowledge about
the population to handpick the relevant individuals to
be included in the sample.14 Five lecturers made up of
three older nurses and two young nurses with at least
six years and two years-experience respectively as
nurse educators and were willing to participate in the
study were selected. Also, twenty level 400 students
who had been in the program for more than three years
and had gone through at least three clinical practicum
periods were selected purposively, making a total of 25
participants for the qualitative study.
Data
Collection
Methods,
Instruments
and Procedures: Three main methods, and 4
instruments,made up of questionnaires distribution with
separate questionnaires for nursing lecturers and nursing
students, in-depth interviews with in-depth interview
guide for lecturers, and focus group discussions (FGDs)
with FGD guide for students.
The instruments were piloted to check their suitability
for collecting relevant information at the university
of Ghana and to determine the length of time needed
to complete an interview section. The questionnaires
were delivered by hand for respondents to complete for
collection within a week of receipt. In-depth interviews
were conducted by the first author in the comfort of the
offices of the lecturers with each interview session lasting
about 30 to 45 minutes. Focus group discussions with
four (4) groups of level 400 students with five students
in each group were conducted at convenient sites on the
campuses of the study universities with an experienced
FDG facilitator with assistance from the second author.
The quantitative method was used to obtain facts and
opinions about balancing teaching with clinical practice,
whilst the qualitative methods were used to generate
in depth information on teaching and clinical practice
in the training of nurses at the degree level.15 Policy
documents from the Nursing and Midwifery Council
(NMC) of Ghana were also reviewed
Data Analysis: The quantitative data were analyzed
using SPSS version 18.0, and descriptive statistics were
used to explain the results.
For the qualitative data, interviews and focus group
discussions were audio-taped in addition to field notes.
These were transcribed verbatim, coded, and categorized
into themes and sub-themes. The major themes in tandem

International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

with the study objectives were identified from the coding
and categorization of the transcribed interviews for
triangulation with the qualitative findings. The concepts
of transferability, confirmation and dependability
were used to assess trustworthiness of the qualitative
findings.15,16 Quotes were then selected to represent
themes, and pseudo names (Lecturer or student) were
used to report the quotes from the respondents.
Ethical Considerations: The research protocol met
the guidelines for research involving human subjects
of the Ethical Committee for Humanities (ECH) of
the Office of Research, Innovation and Development
(ORID), University of Ghana. Written informed
consent were obtained from all participants before their
involvement in the study. Research procedures and
purpose were explained carefully and thoroughly to
allay the fears of all participants, and confidentiality was
assured and maintained for all participants throughout
study by the use of code numbers on the transcripts with
the participant’s identity only known to the researchers.
Each participant was also given the opportunity to ask
questions, and the chance to opt out of the study anytime
he/she wanted to. All participants were assured that their
involvement had nothing to do with their job evaluation
or their acquisition of their degree. Consent was also
obtained from participants to publish the findings of the
research with anonymous quotes.

Results and Discussion
Demographic Characteristics of Respondents:
Most of the lecturers (93%; n=28) were in their thirties
(30s) to early forties (40s), 20% (n=6) were males and
80% (n=24) were females. Fifty percent (n=25) of
the lecturers were married and 50% (n=25) were not
married. Eighty percent (n=24) of the lecturers had been
employed by the universities for5 years or less.
Experienced Versus Competent Practitioners:
A competent practitioner is defined as having 2-3 years
of experience in the same or similar setting, engages in
conscious and deliberate planning, and consistently uses

89

an analytic framework. An experienced practitioner on
the other hand has practiced for 6 or more years in the
same or similar setting and does not rely on maxims,
rules, or analytic frameworks to practice.17
Most of the lecturer respondents 66.7% (n=20) can
be described as competent in nursing practice and only
3.3% (n=1) can be regarded as experienced. Looking at
the demands of being a nurse educator in the university,
it takes experience in the practice of nursing to be able
to train students to be competent and proficient nurses.
The majority of the lecturers are in the beginning stages
of their career as nursing lecturers. Engaging students
in finding answers to clinical questions through care
of real-life patients takes experience to deliver, and
lecturers three years on the job might not have that
kind of experience. This paints a gloomy picture of the
ability of the lecturers to train student nurses to become
proficient professionals. Considering the fact that
there is ample anecdotal and some empirical evidence
indicating dissatisfaction among the Ghanaian public on
the state of nursing care18, this observation is worrisome
since incompetent nursing care is likely to compromise
quality and safe patient care.
Whilst, Littleand Milliken’s19 assertion may be
generally true (especially in High-Income Countries),
one needs to look beyond length of practice, and cover
other relevant factors that may facilitate or hinder
competence building in low and middle-income country
context like Ghana. These factors may include enabling
and supportive work environment, positive attitudes,
mentoring, low level of hostility/competition and
resources availability, among others.
Nurse Educator’s Obligation and Expectation
to Teach Theory and Practice: All the lecturerparticipants (100 % (n= 30)) indicated that a lecturer has
the obligation to link theory and practice in the training
of the student nurse, whilst 92% (n=42) of the studentparticipants indicated same, 2% (n=1) of the students
answered no with the remaining 6% (n=3) indicating
they were not sure.

90

International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

Table 1: Nurse Educator’ Obligation to link Theory to Practice, and Perception of Nurse Educators’
Clinical Competence
Nurse Educator’s Obligation to
link theory to Practice

Freq.

%

Freq.

%

Freq.

%

Lecturers

30

100.0

-

-

-

-

Students

46

92.0

1

2.0

3

6.0

Yes

No

Not Sure

Perception of Nurse Educators’ Clinical Competence
Lecturers

17

56.7

2

6.7

11

36.7

Students

17

34.0

10

20.0

23

46.0

n (Lecturers) = 30; n (Students) = 50

The qualitative findings showed that both lecturers
and nursing students identify clinical competency as
an important quality of an effective nurse educator,
therefore nursing lecturers are obliged to teach both
theory and practice:
“I think being able to teach both theory and practice
should be an obligation. I cannot comprehend how you
will be teaching nursing and will not teach the practical.
If you can’t then you are not a nurse.” (Lecturer)
“Nursing Lecturer you must have both skills,if you
are teaching and you cannot site examples from the
field, how can you each well? We like lecturers who can
relate theory to their experiences from the field, it makes
me understand things better.” (Student)
With reference to integrating clinical practice
with theoretical delivery in a university context,this
observation blends with the assertion by highlighting
the need for nurse educators to gain competency in
clinical practice because nursing is a practice-based
profession.20 It also imperative in contemporary times
where university student nurses have generally been
criticized for not being able to deliver patient care
adequately.11 However, the discourse on teaching both
theory and practice in the training of nurses at the
university level in several advanced countries (where the
nursing profession has developed better relative to the
Ghanaian context) is polarized. Some researchers have
noted that there are conflicting views about whether
nurse educator’s priority should be in academia or in
clinical practice.21 Thus, while some studies have argued
against the need for nurse educator to be clinically
competent, stressing that the theory can be taught in
classroom context, leaving the practical aspects to be
taught by professional nurses in a hospital context, other

researchers have held a contrary view arguing in support
of the need for nurse educators to blend the two aspects
of nursing.22
The argument of the former is pivoted on several
considerations, for example, some have cited demands
imposed on them by virtue of their position as nurse
lecturers which adds further burden on their work,
especially when no further compensation is provided for
the discharge of such extra responsibilities as supervising
and mentoring students on clinicals.21 The latter who
have argued in support of the claim have underscored the
need for this by claiming inter alia that nurse educators
are equally professional nurses who practiced before
becoming lecturers,thus there is no reason why both
aspect cannot be integrated to make a whole.
Whiles none of the two claims can be empirically
confirmed in Ghana and no research has been carried
on this issue, some respondents in the focus group
discussions (FGD) for students and the in-depth
interviews for lecturers expressed sentiments which
confirm the latter.
“Most nurse educators know it is an obligation
to teach both, but some did not work before entering
the teaching field, so they do not have the practical
experience. They want to justify their relevance by
insisting that practical experience is not necessary for
one to be a lecturer, but it is necessary”. (Lecturer)
“How can you be teaching nursing if you are not
proficient in the practice? We do not nurse the air, we
nurse patients”. (Lecturer)
“It will be better the lecturers teach us the practical
themselves. We have preceptors to coach us on the

International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

clinical, but most of the time we never see them the
whole time that we we’re the ward. They do not put us in
the same ward or shift as the preceptors, and the ward
nurses don’t have time for us,they’re overwhelmed with
workload.” (Student)
“The lecturers know us better and can mentor us
better in the clinical environment.” (Student)
Perception of Nurse Educator’s Clinical
Competence: The majority (56.7%; n=17) of lecturers
perceived that they were clinically proficient, and 6.7%
(n=2) felt they were not, the remaining 36.7% (n=11)
were not sure. However, only 34% (n=17) of the studentparticipants perceived that their lecturers were clinically
competent, 20% (n=) felt they were not, and 46% (n
=23) indicated they were not sure. (see table 2)
These findings were further clarified by responses
from the FGDs:
“You can tell those who are experienced in practice
and those who are not. Those who know the job always
site examples from the field,their teaching is not abstract,
Those who do not have experience are defensive and do
not entertain questions, they are always reading to us
not teaching” (Student)
Perception shapes the way people relate to each
other; it also shapes expectations from one another.
Where the perceptions of two people meet favorably, the
outcome is usually positive. On the other hand, where
the perceptions of two people are at variance with each
other, the outcome is likely to yield negative results. The
same applies in the student nurse- lecturer relationship.
For example, when the perception of the lecturer’s
clinical competency by the student is in doubt, it is likely
to affect the student nurse’s ability to learn clinical skills.
The findings present a paradox, particularly when the two
groups are supposed to work together towards a common
outcome of producing competent nurses. The perception
of the majority of lecturers on their clinical proficiency
and the perception of the majority of students on the
clinical proficiency of their lecturers are at variance with
each other, a situation that may yield negative results.
Thus, although the students acknowledged that their
lecturers have the obligation to both theory aspect and
clinical skills, they do not perceive most of their lecturers
as being able to do so effectively.
Theory and Practice Gap in the Training of
Nurses: Ninety percent (n=27) of lecturers agreed

91

that there is a theory and practice gap in the training
of nurses whilst and only 10 % (n=3) disagreed. Fortyeight percent of students (n= 24) also agreed that there
is a theory and practice gap, 32% (n=16) felt there is
no theory and practice gap, and 20% (n=10) stated they
were not sure (Table 2).
The qualitative findings were in support of the
quantitative results:
“With the few clinical experiences I had, I wouldn’t
say that I am competent, I still have a lot to learn, we do
not get to practice much in school because the university
curriculum is full of theory” (Lecturer)
Some reasons given by lecturers were: University
academic calendar does not provide enough time
for clinical practice. Autonomy is not given to nurse
educators to plan clinical activities for student nurses.
“The university system has contributed in a way
because it is difficult to get the university authorities
to accept that we need time for practical. The nursing
school uses the university-wide timetable and trying to
fit in time for practical is very difficult.”(Lecturer)
“For us to adequately train nurses, the universities
have to give us the autonomy to have our own timetable
so we can plan our activities to suit the demands of our
program, but this is difficult since the students take other
courses from other departments.”(Lecturer)
Nursing is a profession based on scientific
knowledge and clinical practice.23 The student nurse
therefore needs to be prepared to play a dual role of
using scientific knowledge to deliver a holistic and
appropriate patient, family, and population care. Other
studies have suggested that there is a gap between theory
and practice in the training of nurses where students
find out they were unable to integrate what they learnt
in the classroom with real life patients.24 The shock of
practice is a crisis moment experienced by most nursing
students when they enter the clinical workplace.23 This
is marked by a decrease in their ability to incorporate the
basic Biomedical Science knowledge into their clinical
reasoning. Although no empirical data exist about this
problem in the Ghanaian context, anecdotal evidence
exists to affirm this fact.
In Ghana, the entry level rank for a university
graduate nurse is Nursing Officer, which is a senior
supervisory position. Thus, the new graduate nurse does

92

International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

not take instructions from staff nurses who may be more
competent and experienced in the clinical environment.
Hence, the graduate nurse does not get the chance to
learn and master clinical skills. These graduates are the
ones who get the opportunity for higher education and
get employed as lecturers.
“University-trained nurses are made senior staff as
soon as they qualify and take on supervisory role, thus,
they’re not involved in most of the basic care giving
activities, so they continue to lack practical experience.
The junior staff know the practical work more than them,
they are proficient in theory” (Lecturer)
“The ward nurses are not willing to teach us clinical
skills because we’ll be their bosses when we graduate,
Even the registered nurses who are now pursuing their
degree with us are unwilling to teach us. They teach
the Nursing Training College (NTC) students, and send
us on errands when we’re with them for practical”
(Student)
Since the graduate nurse enters the profession
at senior level the training curriculum might have to
be designed to allow enough practical components
to equip them with experience and confidence in the
clinical environment to enhance their competence after
graduation
Requirement for Nurse Educators’ Clinical
Practice: Most high-income-countries have policies in
place that require nurse educators to engage in clinical
practice to enable them balance teaching theory and
practice effectively. It is expected that Ghana should have
similar policies in place, and all the lecturer participants
indicated that the Nursing and Midwifery Council
(NMC) of Ghana has a requirement for clinical practice
for nurse educators. However, the in-depth interviews
revealed that there is no monitoring as to whether the
requirements are fulfilled or not:
“There is a logbook that we’re required to record
our practice periods in it and use it to renew our PIN.
But how many times has the NMC even asked about it?
No one monitors to see whether you go and practice and
fill the logbook or not.” (Lecturer)
Elsewhere, nurse educators are committed to their
clinical roles because regulatory bodies have developed
competency requirements for nurses in academia to
follow and have put in place monitoring mechanisms in
place. For instance, in the United Kingdom, the National

Board for Nursing, Midwifery and Health Visiting has
mandated that nurse educators spend 20% of their time
in practice,Ghana may have to emulate this.25

Conclusion
The advent of higher education in nursing has come
both as a bane and a blessing to nursing education in
low-and-middle-income countries such as Ghana.
Looking at the role of nursing in ensuring quality patient
care and patient safety, it is important that nurses are
adequately trained in theory and practice. Hence, the
essence of emphasizing clinical practice in university
nursing programs cannot be omitted. Most nursing
lecturers in Ghana had a short duration of clinical
exposure for two to three years before joining academia,
thus, the gap in theory and clinical proficiency. Since the
graduate nurse enters the profession at senior level, the
training curriculum may have to be re-designed to allow
enough practical components that will equip them to
gain confidence in the clinical environment and become
competent in clinical practice by the time they graduate
from school. This can only be possible if the universities
recognize that Nursing education should be granted the
autonomy to design their own calendar of activities.
There is also the need for the NMC of Ghana to
put monitory regulations in place to ensure that nurse
educators update and maintain their clinical proficiency.
Future research that investigates the policies of the NMC
to monitor clinical competence of the nurse educator
will be beneficial to the Ghanaian nursing education at
the university level.
Conflict of Interest: Nil
Source of Funding: Self

References
1.

McNamara S. Development and implementation
of specialized nurse practitioner role: Use of the
PEPPA framework to achieve success. Nursing and
Health Sciences. 2009 Aug 17; 11(3):318-325

2.

Akiwumi A. Roles, competencies and qualities of
the nurse in Ghana in the 21st century. A. Akiwumi
(Ed.), Nursing education in Ghana for the 21st
century. Accra, Ghana: Woeli Publishing Service.
1992.

3.

Dubois CA, D’Amour D, Pomey MP, Girard F,
Brault I. Conceptualizing performance of nursing
care as a prerequisite for better measurement: a

International Journal of Nursing Education, January-March 2021, Vol. 13, No. 1

systematic and interpretive review. BMC nursing.
2013 Dec 1;12(1):7.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Desborough J, Banfield M, Parker R. A tool to
evaluate patients’ experiences of nursing care
in Australian general practice: development of
the Patient Enablement and Satisfaction Survey.
Australian Journal of Primary Health. 2014 Jun
6;20(2):209-15.
Larrabee JH, Ostrow CL, Withrow ML, Janney
MA, Hobbs Jr GR, Burant C. Predictors of patient
satisfaction with inpatient hospital nursing care.
Research in nursing & health. 2004 Aug;27(4):25468.
Hmelo-Silver CE, Chernobilsky E, DaCosta MC.
Psychological tools in problem-based learning.
In: Tan O, editor. Enhancing thinking through
problem-based learning approaches: International
perspectives. 2004:17-37.
Wilkerson L, Gijselaers W. Concluding comments.
In Wilkerson L, Gijselaers W.Bringing problembased learning to higher education: Theory and
practice. New directions in teaching and learning. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers.1996;101-104.
Gijselaers WH. Connecting problem-based
practices with educational theory. In Wilkerson
L, Gijselaers W. Bringing problem-based learning
to higher education: Theory and practice. New
directions in teaching and learning. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass Publishers.1996: 13-22
Dochy F, Segers M, Van den Bossche P, Gijbels D.
Effects of problem-based learning: A meta-analysis.
Learning and instruction. 2003 Oct 1;13(5):533-68.

10. Punjot P. Nurse’s Role: Beyond the Bedside.
International Journal of Nursing Education and
Research. 2019 Feb 6;7(3):432-434.
11. D’Souza MS, Venkatesaperumal R, Radhakrishnan
J, Balachandran S. Engagement in clinical learning
environment among nursing students: Role of nurse
educators. Open journal of nursing .2013 Mar 1;
27(4): 254-268
12. Creswell JW. Research Design: Qualitative and
Quantitative Approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.2000

93

13. Jick TD. Mixing qualitative and quantitative
methods: Triangulation in action. Administrative
science quarterly. 1979 Dec 1;24(4):602-11.
14. Hungler BP, Beck CT, Polit DF. Essentials
of nursing research: methods, appraisal, and
utilization. Lippincott-Raven; 1997
15. Richards L, Morse JM. Readme first for a user’s
guide to qualitative methods. Sage publications;
2012
16. Lincoln YS, Guba EG. Naturalistic inquiry.
Newberry Park.1985
17. Benner P. Beware of technological imperatives and
commercial interests that prevent best practices.
American Journal of Critical Care. 2003 Sep
1;12(5):469-71.
18.

Yarney L, Buabeng T, Baidoo D, Bawole JN.
Operationalization of the Ghanaian patients’ charter
in a peri-urban public hospital: voices of healthcare
workers and patients. International journal of health
policy and management. 2016 Apr 23;5(9):525.

19. Little MA, Milliken PJ. Practicing what we
preach: Balancing teaching and clinical practice
competencies. International Journal of Nursing
Education Scholarship. 2007 Feb 12;4(1).
20. Fawcett TN, McQueen A. Clinical credibility and
the role of the nurse teacher. Nurse Education
Today. 1994 Aug 1;14(4):264-71.
21. Griscti O, Jacono B, Jacono J. The nurse educator’s
clinical role. Journal of advanced nursing. 2005
Mar 14;50(1):84-92
22. Myrick F, Yonge O. Nursing preceptorship:
Connecting practice and education. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2005.
23. Boshuizen H. The Shock of Practice: Effects on
Clinical Reasoning. Eric.1996.
24. Fatima N, Hussain M, Afzal M, Amir Gilani M.
Nursing Students Challenges at Educational and
Clinical Environment. Journal of Health, Medicine
and Nursing. 2019 May 31; 62: 41-48
25. Aston L, Mallik M, Day C, Fraser D, Collaborative
Research Group. An exploration into the role of the
teacher/lecturer in practice: findings from a case
study in adult nursing. Nurse Education Today.
2000 Apr 1;20(3):178-88.

