International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International Journal of Information Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt

Research Note

Liberation of public data: Exploring central themes in open government data
and freedom of information research

MARK

⁎

Eric Aﬀul-Dadzie , Anthony Aﬀul-Dadzie
Department of Operations and Management Information Systems, University of Ghana Business School, Accra, Ghana

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Open government data (OGD)
Freedom of information (FOI)
Public data
Bibliometrics
Topic modelling
Text mining

This paper conducts a comparative literature survey of Open Government Data (OGD) and Freedom of
Information (FOI), with a view to tracking the central themes in the two civil society campaigns. With seeming
similarities and a growing popularity in research, the major themes framing research on the two movements
have not clearly emerged. Topic modelling, text mining and document analysis methods are used to extract the
themes as well as key named entities. The topics are subsequently labeled and with expert guidance, their
semantic meaning are provided. The results indicate that the major theme in FOI research borders on issues
relating to disclosure, publishing, access and cost of requests. On the other hand, themes in OGD research have
largely centered on technology and related concepts. The approach also helped in determining key similarities
and diﬀerences in the two campaigns as reported in research.

1. Introduction
Freedom of Information (FOI) and Open Government Data (OGD),
are two prominent civil society campaigns championing the course of
liberating government controlled data to the people. Both FOI and OGD
primarily seek to make government data progressively free and easily
accessible (Ubaldi, 2013). Largely, the twin but independent campaigns
of FOI and OGD have been driven by (1) a global call on nations to oﬀer
a more accountable and transparent governance (2) a growing trend of
sophistication in citizens’ preferences and choices of government services (Holler, 2012; Lau, Patel, Fahmy, & Kaufman, 2014; Van Dooren,
Bouckaert, & Halligan, 2015; Weisberg & Nawara, 2010) and (3) an
opportunity to amend past policies, where data collected by government agencies tended to be the exclusive reserve of the state (Yiu,
2012). The two movements have thus become a global mouth piece of
advocacy towards a more open and transparent governance. Over the
years, the two campaigns have received considerable traction in the
media as well as in academia (Charalabidis, Alexopoulos, & Loukis,
2016). For instance, basic statistics regarding the yearly number of
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, downloads, appraisal reports, number of workshops and conferences held, together with other
speciﬁc country initiatives, point to a growing interest among stakeholders (Whitmore, 2012). A similar trend is seen in yearly OGD reports, where accounts by the Independent Reporting Mechanism (IRM)
of Open Government Partnership (the body responsible for the launch
of OGD in 2011), indicate a steady progress by most member states

⁎

(Frey, 2014). Other independent accounts in the literature also show
signiﬁcant progress in OGD in the US (Krishnamurthy & Awazu, 2016),
UK (Tinati, Carr, Halford, & Pope, 2012), Taiwan (Wang & Lo, 2016),
Spain (Carrasco & Sobrepere, 2015), and a host of many other countries
including local government authorities such as cities and federal states.
In addition, many global experiences have also been shared of how FOI
and OGD are impacting governance particularly in the ﬁght against
corruption, economic empowerment and the quest for greater citizen
engagements (Birkinshaw, 2010; Halstuk & Chamberlin, 2006; Jetzek,
Avital, & Bjørn-Andersen, 2012; Shepherd, Stevenson, & Flinn, 2009;
US. Senate, 2007Zeleti et al., 2016).
In the wave of the relative progress, there have also been reports of
misconceptions, myths, deﬁnitional challenges and general obstacles
besetting real-world practice by the two campaign groups (Camaj,
2016; Evans & Campos, 2013; Gigler, Custer, & Rahemtulla, 2011;
Hubbard, 2008; Janssen, Charalabidis, & Zuiderwijk, 2012; Schartum,
1998; Zuiderwijk & Janssen, 2014). Such wide ranging experiences of
“the good, bad and the ugly” of FOI and OGD, have occasioned numerous research publications covering a range of topics. However, as
the ﬁelds of FOI and OGD continue to evolve, what the central themes
are as far as research publications are concerned, have not clearly
emerged. Furthermore, given that the two campaigns not only share
similarities but diﬀerences (Ubaldi, 2013), it is imperative to understand how key concepts are unconsciously being framed in publications
relating to the two notions. In view of this, this paper seeks to determine what the major themes have so far been in relation to the two

Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: eaﬀul-dadzie@ug.edu.gh (E. Aﬀul-Dadzie), aaﬀul-dadzie@ug.edu.gh (A. Aﬀul-Dadzie).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.05.009
Received 8 August 2016; Received in revised form 20 April 2017; Accepted 19 May 2017
Available online 03 July 2017
0268-4012/ © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

E. Aﬀul-Dadzie, A. Aﬀul-Dadzie

helped to establish national and city-based open government data
portals around the world. Since the two advocacy groups essentially
lobby governments around the world into adopting the concepts, ﬁrst
visible signs of activity are always in the form of endorsements or declarations by sovereign governments. As at 2016, 70 countries have
signed the OGD declaration and are at various actionable stages2 On the
other hand, FOI has at 2015, over 95 countries that have adopted some
mode of FOI legislation.3
Besides similarities between FOI and OGD, diﬀerences also exist in
terms of the guiding principles and their approach to liberating public
data (Ubaldi, 2013). For instance, whereas FOI emphasizes on the
fundamental human rights of people to information (legal arguments),
OGD campaigns on the economic and social beneﬁts that potentially
accrue to people when public datasets and documents are made readily
available to all for use, reuse and subsequent distribution (Janssen,
2012). It is the view of OGD advocates that, making public data free
and easily accessible, not only improves democratic participation but
also allows individuals to create new products and services based on
informed and reliable public data (Janssen et al., 2012; Maude, 2012).
The primary goals of the two campaigns, according to Janssen (2012),
also inﬂuence the kinds of datasets mostly sought after in each group.
Datasets such as transport data, geographic data, corporate data and
general business information which have the potential to spur innovation and economic growth, are mostly of interest to OGD advocates. On
the other hand, given the professional background of most FOI proponents (lawyers, media practitioners etc.), the most preferred datasets
tend to be government budgets and expenditure, revenue data, legal
information as well as documents covering reports and meeting minutes
of key government agencies. Another dimension of OGD advocacy
diﬀerent from FOI, is the emphasis on deploying latest information
technology tools that help in the release of public datasets. The technical dimension of OGD sets it apart from FOI particularly on how clear
speciﬁcations are recommended on how to model, create, publish, store
and release government data in various formats for easy accessibility.
For instance, proponents of OGD tend to emphasize that datasets are
stored and accessed in non-proprietary machine readable formats, such
as CSV, XML, TSV, RDF (Berners-Lee, 2006). Furthermore, OGD recommends that adequate metadata and linked data technology are
provided for public datasets. Thus, unlike RTI, the concept of open
government data (OGD) transcends the emphasis on fundamental
human rights of people to access information. Rather, focus is also on
providing data management and exchange tools that make the idea of
accessibility, re-use and distribution, a reality. Other recognized differences between FOI and OGD are also seen in the way they approach
copyright and licensing issues. FOI implementation tends to diﬀer from
country to country especially since some countries are very restrictive
on what can be published and reused. OGD on the other hand, grants an
inherent license to users to freely use, reuse and distribute public data.4
Further, because of the often legal approach adopted by FOI, its relationship with other stakeholders, especially public sector employees
and politicians are sometimes antagonistic rather than collaborative as
often seen in OGD approaches.5 In the following section, the methodology adopted in the study to investigate the central themes ‘running’
in academic publications in the two movements is explained.

campaigns. It is our view that determining the central message shaping
the two campaigns, would not only shed light on what key topics deﬁne
each movement, but would also help establish whether the similarities
and the seeming diﬀerences between the two concepts naturally emerge
especially in research.
In the years before and after the launch of FOI and OGD, a considerable number of academic publications have been authored spanning various topics and issues. However, none so far has attempted to
comparatively explore the ‘running’ themes in the two concepts. The
few literature reviews available were conducted separately by only
focusing on either of the two notions. For instance, Attard, Orlandi,
Scerri, and Auer (2015) and Novais, de Albuquerque, and da Silva
Craveiro (2013) conducted separate reviews of literature on open
government data whiles Halstuk and Chamberlin (2006) conducted a
retrospective analysis of the Freedom of Information Act from 1966 to
2006. Mendel (2008) conducted a comparative legal survey but however only centered on FOI. Furthermore, the methodological approaches adopted in review articles conducted on FOI or OGD are different from what this paper proposes. This study is therefore uniquely
positioned to contribute to theory and ﬁll research gaps in the following
ways. First, key topics and associative terms ‘running’ in scientiﬁc
discourses on the two civil movements are identiﬁed and compared.
Secondly, the paper also identiﬁes location-based named entities of
interest to frame how FOI and OGD are being implemented around the
world. The results provide a means to understand the central themes
shaping each campaign and some potential future research directions
on OGD and FOI.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, a brief overview
of FOI and OGD covering history and key concepts are explained.
Further, diﬀerences and similarities between the two notions as captured in the literature, are presented. This is followed by the methodology which explains the approach to data collection and presents a
brief introduction to text analysis concepts and their relevance to the
study. Research questions guiding the study are subsequently presented. The results of the study, discussion and conclusion are further
presented.
2. FOI Vs OGD
The idea of open government data (OGD) is generally viewed as an
oﬀshoot of Freedom of Information (FOI), also sometimes known as
Right to Information (Ubaldi, 2013). However, the two movements
come under the broader concept of open government, which seeks
transparency and greater rights of information access for citizens
(Tauberer, 2012). It must be noted that while civil resistance movements are not completely new, the quest for openness and access to
government controlled information (spearheaded by FOI and OGD), is a
fairly modern concept. Together, the two campaigns are contributing to
opening wide the frontiers of democracy, ﬁghting corruption and empowering citizens.
Freedom of Information was oﬃcially given a stamp of approval in a
United Nations General Assembly Resolution in 1946. It was further
strengthened in 1948 through Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights (Donnelly, 2013). The UN initiative, set the tone for the
adoption of FOI Act (FOIA) in most countries. Open government data on
the other hand, was ﬁrst conceived in 2007 when 30 OGD campaigners
met in California to deliberate on principles to guide the new movement
(Chignard, 2013). This meeting and other close eﬀorts such as the
Public Sector Information (PSI) Directive of 2003, U.S. President
Obama’s open data initiative of 2009, helped set up the open government data partnership (Attard et al., 2015; Tauberer, 2012). More recently, the G8 Open Data Charter.1 in 2013 have all contributed to
strengthening the ideals of OGD. These current and past initiatives have
1

3. Methodology
The main part of the research design used topic modelling. Text
mining and document analysis methods were used mainly to clean and
2

http://www.opengovpartnership.org/countries.
http://www.right2info.org/access-to-information-laws/access-to-information-laws#_
ftnref7.
4
http://webfoundation.org/2015/08/freedom-of-information-and-open-governmentdata-communities-could-beneﬁt-from-closer-collaboration/.
5
https://www.article19. org/data/ﬁles/pdfs/standards/righttoknow.pdf.
3

http://opendatacharter.net/history/.

665

International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

E. Aﬀul-Dadzie, A. Aﬀul-Dadzie

Table 1
Inclusion and Exclusion Search Criteria.
Search Criterion/Task

Inclusion

Exclusion

Comparative Survey
Document Type
Language
Time Period
Bibliographic database
Data cleaning

FOI; OGD
Journal articles, Conference proceedings and Book chapters.
English
FOI: – 2015; OGD: – 2015
Web of Science and Scopus
Main text spanning introduction to conclusion sections of each
article

Any unrelated
Editorial, Doctoral dissertations, master’s theses, textbooks, Letters, Erratum etc.
Non-English
After 2015
All other database
Title page, keywords, references, funding sources and acknowledgements
sections.

transform the textual data. The methodology is conveniently segmented
into three phases of text pre-processing, processing and information extraction as shown in Fig. 2. The three stages were however preceded by
a data collection phase which primarily employed document analysis
(Owen, 2014) techniques to gather the data. Particularly, the inclusion
and exclusion search criteria in document analysis was used to reﬁne
the data search as shown in Table 1. The following section presents a
brief introduction to the text analysis approaches used in the study and
further explains what the data collection stage entailed.
3.1. Text analysis
The era of massive generation of digital textual data is impacting
positively on text analysis research and practice. Robust tools and
methods (Aggarwal & Zhai, 2012) that help to glean meaningful information from large amounts of documents are consistently being introduced to keep pace with a growing research ﬁeld. Text analysis tools
and methods are popularly used in information and document retrieval,
text summarization, document dis(similarity) identiﬁcation, language
identiﬁcation and document authorship attribution (Witten, 2005).
However, irrespective of the text analysis method involved, the end
goal is always about extracting high-quality information from textual
data. An eﬀective text analysis project, according to DiMaggio, Nag,
and Blei (2013), must (1) be reproducible (2) automated (3) inductive
to patterns and (4) provide “relationality” in diﬀerent contexts. These
requirements demonstrate an improvement over non-computational
methods. In this study, the term text analysis is expediently used to
encompass digital text computational methods such as text mining and
topic modelling, even though the terms text analysis and text mining
are also sometimes used synonymously. In the following section, a brief
introduction to topic modelling as used in the study is presented.

Fig. 1. The Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) Model.
(Source: Blei et al., 2003)

that wv = 1 and wu = 0 for u ≠ v. The following deﬁnitions are used to
further explain the concept as demonstrated graphically in Fig. 1. A
document is deﬁned as a sequence of N words expressed as
W = (w1, w2, …, wN ) , where wN is the nth word in the sequence.
A corpus is a collection of M documents denoted by
D = (w1, w2, …, wN )
α is the parameter of the topic Dirichlet prior per document topic
distributions
β is the parameter of the word Dirichlet prior per document topic
distributions
θ is the topic distribution for document i
φ is the word distribution for topic k,
D = {wi} corpus, each wi denotes a word
Z = {z i} latent topic assigned to words in W
Over the years, topic modelling has been used extensively in a
number of areas such as fraud detection (Xing & Girolami, 2007), spam
ﬁltering (Bíró, Szabó, & Benczúr, 2008), clustering scientiﬁc documents
(Yau et al., 2014), determining business topics in a source code
(Maskeri, Sarkar, & Heaﬁeld, 2008), detecting phishing websites
(Ramanathan & Wechsler, 2012), framing ideas in history (Hall et al.,
2008),
social
network
analysis
(Ríos,
Aguilera,
Bustos,
Omitola, & Shadbolt, 2013), understanding how the media frames certain topical issues (Aﬀul-Dadzie, Nabareseh, Oplatková, & Klímek,
2016) among many others. Topic modelling applications have also been
extended to bibliometric review, as evident in the following articles
(Griﬃths & Steyvers, 2004; Jiang, Qiang, & Lin, 2016; Mann,
Mimno, & McCallum, 2006). The use of text analysis in bibliometric
analysis is relatively new and the approach is a departure from manually analyzing documents one at a time. In this study, LDA based topic
modelling, general text mining techniques and document analysis are
used to extract information from research articles with a view to establishing central themes that conceptually frame research discourses
on open government data (OGD) and Freedom of Information (FOI).
The following section explains the data collection phase as simpliﬁed in
the inclusion and exclusion search criteria in Table 1.

3.1.1. Topic modelling
In the last decade, the concept of topic modelling has become one of
the most trending research areas in text analysis (Wang & Blei, 2011;
Wei & Croft, 2006). Topic modelling is basically used to summarize
large corpora of text by revealing hidden themes in textual data (Blei,
Ng, & Jordan, 2003; Chang, Gerrish, Wang, Boyd-Graber, & Blei, 2009;
DiMaggio et al., 2013). There are three topic models namely Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA), Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing and
Correlated Topic Models. The most utilized model is the LDA algorithm,
which uses Bayesian statistical model to treat documents as a random
bag of words over latent topics and where each topic is characterized by
a distribution over words (Blei et al., 2003; Blei, 2012). Further, the
technique works by identifying clusters of words that frequently cooccur in a corpus of text without regard to word order. In view of this, it
is recommended that a relatively large size of textual data is used so as
to help increase the likelihood of themes of text being found together.
The LDA algorithm may be described formally as shown in Fig. 1 culled
from Blei et al. (2003) and Yau, Porter, Newman, and Suominen (2014).
In a vocabulary indexed as {1, …, V } , words are represented as unitbasis vectors where a unit document is equal to one and the rest of the
components equal to zero. Representing the components with superscripts, a vth word in the vocabulary is denoted by a V-vector w such
666

International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

E. Aﬀul-Dadzie, A. Aﬀul-Dadzie

Fig. 2. Conceptual framework for the comparative survey.
(Source: authors)

4. Data collection

research questions. In all, the questions were designed to aid in
‘framing’ trending concepts in FOI and OGD as captured in research
publications. The following questions guided the research:
RQ1. What are the central themes in FOI and OGD research publications?
RQ2. How do similarities and diﬀerences identiﬁed in the topics
compare with what have speciﬁcally been written in the literature?
RQ3. How do the topic labelling (classiﬁcation) frame the discourses
of FOI and OGD research?
RQ4. What do named entities especially occurrences of countries,
regions and cities in the topics say about the campaign?

Research publications were selected guided by the following criteria
(i) an automated search availability (ii) quality and prominence of
publications and (iii) reputation of the bibliographic database. In line
with the above considerations, we settled on the Web of Science and
Scopus; widely recognized as the two most prominent bibliographic
databases (Aghaei Chadegani et al., 2013; Wang & Waltman, 2016).
Journal articles, conference proceedings and book chapters were the
only kinds of research documents deemed appropriate for the study.
The document search was aided by relevant key search phrases and
terms, which ensured that only articles suitable to the study were selected. For instance, search phrases such as ‘freedom of information’,
‘freedom of information act’, ‘right to information’, ‘right to information act’, ‘access to information (ATI)’ were used to search articles on
FOI. Similarly, ‘open government data’, ‘open data’, ‘government data
portal’, ‘government public data’ and ‘public data portal’ guided the
search of articles on OGD.
In addition, a pre-condition was that, key terms or phrases must
have appeared in the article title but without strict recourse to word
sequencing. This meant that terms such as ‘government open data’ or
‘public government data’ were considered as guides for selection. The
search strategy was partly adopted from Attard et al. (2015). After initial downloads of the articles, a document analysis was carried out to
further scrutinize the articles. This approach ensured that only articles
related to the concepts under study were included. For instance, there
were article titles that had the phrase ‘right information’ but which
actually had nothing to do with right to information. A thorough
document analysis helped to remove all such unrelated articles. In all,
780 articles were collected on FOI and were subsequently trimmed
down to 430. Similarly, the OGD article search resulted in 392 articles
of which 281 were deemed appropriate for the study.

5.1. Phase 1: pre-processing
The pre-processing phase involved a number of text cleaning procedures to transform the documents into requisite formats for processing. The ﬁrst procedure utilized a series of R programming codes to
convert the pdf documents into text format. Subsequent codes helped to
strip the articles of title pages, abstracts, keywords, references, funding
sources, notes, acknowledgements and appendixes, leaving only the
‘main’ content beginning from “introduction to conclusion”. This procedure was necessary to eliminate sections in the articles that could
unduly inﬂuence the outcome of the text analysis. Following this, a
number of steps were taken to transform the corpus ready for processing. These included converting the corpus into lower case characters,
striping whitespaces, removing punctuations, sparse terms, numbers as
well as stop-words. The study utilized relevant packages in the R
Statistical Computing Software for all the text analysis including the
pre-processing and the text processing phases. The main libraries or
packages utilized in the study were the tm package (for text mining),
mallet package (for LDA topic modelling), and SnowballC (for stemming).

5. Research questions

5.2. Phase 2: text processing and results

To get the most out of the comparative literature survey, a set of
pre-deﬁned questions were used to guide the study. This approach was
particularly useful as it helped to map the results generated to the

This stage involved the deployment of the mallet LDA library together with other relevant libraries in R to ﬁrst train, and subsequently
generate the topics. The study experimented with a diﬀerent number of
667

International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

E. Aﬀul-Dadzie, A. Aﬀul-Dadzie

Table 2
The Top 15 frequent words in each topic on FOI research.
Topic

Frequent Terms (Stemmed)

Topic 1
Topic 2
Topic 3
Topic 4
Topic 5
Topic 6
Topic 7
Topic 8
Topic 9
Topic 10
Topic 11
Topic 12
Topic 13
Topic 14
Topic 15
Topic 16
Topic 17
Topic 18
Topic 19
Topic 20
Topic 21
Topic 22
Topic 23

privaci- mug public shot court interest disclosur. u.s. exempt foia feder- circuit crimin- law report
social societi- state polit- economy- knowledg- role process develop technolog- market mean concept model peoplfreedom inform law media law press foil polit- news diﬀus- legisl- nation studi- country- access
health data clinic trial right public registr- supra note trial human privaci- drug report research
rti govern india public rtia state corrupt citizen peopl- local indian delhi act societi- time
request foi inform govern institut- feder- public access law canada law request provinci- commission atia
media foia news public journalist request fee waiver blogger interest request blog document interest context
librari research africa servic- world univers- develop local- servic- interest nation internet report communic- commissati/foi belief request govern belief agenc- account evid- autonomi- text work request truth agent inspect
right human inform internet world intern organis- communic- onlin- group activist countri- wikileak communic- work
foi countri- act south implement countri- africa public request law societi- studi- level develop civil
right court articl- adolesc- human european ecthr convent express posit public case media societi- state
from made time case import number part nation case issu- system includ- year found make
act inform public interest author commission foi request subject decis- code request exempt disclosur- held
foi govern cabinet disclosur- request freedom legisl- polit- account civil reform impact london ﬂow central
act govern public agenc- foia record feder- agenc- congress execut- secur- law hous- u. s oﬃcinform access freedom legal protect data make law person privat- provid- general polici- citizen privacicourt agenc- foia document request disclosur- from exempt record district depart subject cir appeal u. s. c
corrupt foia state public oﬃci- court strong from state year convict law local govern law
govern public european document council parliament bill institut- author oﬃci- legisl- provis- open institut- administrdata record manag- research request foi public request author legisl- local council nhs studi- vexatipublic law commiss- inform decis- disclosur- court regul- articl- applic- bodi- administr- decis- ministry- foi
state oil nepa pipelin- environment keyston- sand public depart climat- emiss- chang- propos- impact ghg

Table 3
The Top 15 frequent words in each topic on OGD research.
Topic

Frequent Terms (Stemmed)

Topic 1
Topic 2
Topic 3
Topic 4
Topic 5
Topic 6
Topic 7
Topic 8
Topic 9
Topic 10
Topic 11
Topic 12
Topic 13
Topic 14
Topic 15
Topic 16
Topic 17
Topic 18
Topic 19

contract qualiti- busi- portal result gdp averag- number countri- dataset tabl- reliabl- publish oﬃci- noticgovern servic- citizen app model data citizen provis- develop platform busi- crm mobil- citi- culturgovern progress web ﬁgur- social brazil websit- feder- analysi- government websit- societi- public peopl- system
govern transpar- matur- level open agenc- social model collabor- particip- benchmark engag- media feder- benchmark
dataset link ogd dataset architectur- sourc- social approach initi- portal integr- publish order metadata model
logd web portal dataset entiti- data. gov sourc- rdf integr- contract u. s databas- entiti- agenc- sourcvisual catalog ogd catalog data portal user display system visual tool analysi- qualiti- web record
ogd innov- adopt beneﬁt barrier factor organ perceiv- busi- inﬂuenc- social janssen busi- model user
govern open agenc- govern initi- transpar- polici- dataset portal develop countri- particip- share local privatindia organis- nation polici- technolog- rti peopl- studi- act state e − govern indian societi- govern centrinform public servic- research citizen access provid- case govern make knowledg- onlin- work sweden relatbusi- model municip- citi- urban user social set model group citi- dimens- dimens- strategi- privatpublic inform sector psi re − use direct european access polici- licens- bodi- govern licens- principl- australian
project releas- aid develop polici- local competit- research citi- transpar- project approach eﬀect plan agenda
mechan- ogd generat- social innov- economy- energi- access open eﬃci- resourc- particip- technic sector opow
ogd citi- survey implement question research polit- result depart econom- questionnair- beneﬁt administr- respond onlinlink rdf web semant- sparql dataset time ontolog- queri- result metadata forest ﬁre servic- work
ogd research capabl- level dimens- user methodolog- platform evalu- measur- variabl- layer generat- model domain
data open base process analysi- import level user set exist framework result model nation qualiti-

6. Topic interpretation

topics to arrive at the ideal number appropriate for each dataset
(corpus). This was done by generating posterior likelihoods on a
number of models assigning diﬀerent numbers of topics each time. The
result indicated that a maximum of 23 and 19 topics were respectively
appropriate for the FOI and the OGD corpora. The results of the topic
modelling are as presented in Tables 2 and 3 respectively for FOI and
OGD.

FOI
The topic labelling or classiﬁcation was done by interpreting what a
body of topics appears to convey. Guided by expert knowledge and the
literature, it was realized that a number of the topics seemed to fall
under some relevant issues in the two campaigns. In row 1 in Table 4
for instance, the topic label apparently frames issues relating to some
FOI guiding principles and key operational terms. This is because, most
authoritative texts on FOI particularly those that focus on Article 19
(Birkinshaw, 2010; Foerstel, 1999; Mendel, 2008), tend to recognize a
set of guiding principles that are fundamental to the movement.
These FOI guiding principles are “maximum disclosure, obligation to
publish, promotion of open government, limited scope of exceptions (exemptions), processes to facilitate access, costs, open meetings, disclosure
takes precedence and protection for whistleblowers”. The topic label disclosure/publishing/access/costs which has 40.0% of the topics, captures
most of the above FOI principles. In addition, row 2 in Table 4 frames
topic scenarios that have semblance to law, legislation and exemptions to

5.3. Phase 3: information extraction
The topics were interpreted based on expert knowledge and support
of the literature. After generating the topics, they were subsequently
labelled to help frame the central themes in the two research domains
as shown in Tables 4 and 5 respectively. The following sub-sections
present relevant information that were extracted to give meaning to the
topics under each of FOI and OGD. Further, the results from FOI and
OGD are compared for similarities, diﬀerences and general trends in the
topics.
668

International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

E. Aﬀul-Dadzie, A. Aﬀul-Dadzie

Table 4
FOI topic labelling and concept framing.
Concept framing (Topic labelling)

Topic

Topic proportion (%)

Disclosure/Publishing/Access/Costs
Law/Legislation/Exemptions
Service provision
Health/Environmental

Topic 1, Topic 5, Topic 6, Topic 7, Topic 9, Topic 10, Topic 15, Topic 16, Topic 18, Topic 21
Topic 3, Topic 12, Topic 14, Topic 17, Topic 18, Topic 19, Topic 20, Topic 21, Topic 22
Topic 2, Topic 8, Topic 11, Topic 21,
Topic 4, Topic 21, Topic 23,

40.0
35.0
15.0
10.0

In the health/environment category, two topics, 4 and 23, capture
the discourses around health and environmental information disclosures. Topic 4 with words like “health”, “data”, “clinic”, “drug”,
“privaci-”, “report” and “research” is similar to Topic 21 and appears to
focus on health information disclosures, access and attendant privacy
issues. Topic 23 is loaded with lots of environmental issues and concerns relating to freedom of information. The terms “pipelin-”, “keyston”, “oil” and “nepa” readily bring to mind the oil pipeline system in
Canada and the United States, the National Environmental Policy Act
(NEPA) and related concerns. The other terms in the category like
“environment”, “climat-”, “emiss-”, “chang-”, “impact” and “ghg” apparently address issues about how the keystone pipeline project would
impact climate change through emissions and related concerns about
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The study further found that most of
the key terms in the various topics happen to have a strong correlation
among themselves. Terms such as ‘access’, ‘media’, ‘exempt’, ‘legisl-’,
‘privaci-’, ‘request’ and ‘law’ had at least a correlation of 0.70 among
themselves. This gives credence to their regular occurrences in the topics. Topic 13 seemed to be an outlier as no relevant interpretation
could be drawn from it. In determining the proportion of topics under
each label, Topic 13 is not counted as well as topics that appeared in
more than one category, such as Topics 18 and 21.
Overall, we recognize from the proportion of topics under each
classiﬁcation that the central themes in FOI research have largely been
on issues relating to the core principles of FOI; be it issues surrounding
disclosures, publishing, access, costs, exemptions among others.
OGD
Since the launch of open government data in 2009, the campaign to
liberate public data has largely been shaped by the terms Transparency,
Openness, Participation and Collaboration (Krishnamurthy & Awazu,
2016; Lathrop & Ruma, 2010; McDermott, 2010; Veljković,
Bogdanović-Dinić, & Stoimenov, 2014). Surprisingly however, many of
the topics apparently do not capture these widely accepted pillars of
OGD. As shown in Table 5, only two topics representing 12.5% of the
total topics implicitly talk about such. Other labels identiﬁed in the
topics were Technology; Economic/Social/Innovation and Citizen engagement. As many as 50.0% of the topics centre on technology related
matters. This seems to aﬃrm the position by Janssen (2012) that OGD
unlike FOI/RTI is technology driven rather than a rights seeking campaign. For instance, Topic 2 contains the terms “app”, “crm”, “mobil”,
“citizen” and “platform” suggesting the deployment of technologies such
as mobile apps, customer relationship management (CRM) solutions
and other platforms to engage citizens in a democracy. Topic 5 is rich
with OGD technology related terms such as, “link”, “ogd”, “dataset”,
“architectur-”, “portal” and “metadata” which appear to rehash the
technology expectations of a functional open government data platform.
Topic 6 contains other unique technological terms like “logd (linked
open government data)”, “web”, “rdf (Resource Description
Framework)”, “databas-” and “entiti-” which readily point to calls by
OGD proponents for structured non-proprietary machine-readable
technologies that support linked data and also aid in data access use
and redistribution. Topic 7 under the same category also mentions
several technology related terms. It can further be seen that Topic 17 in
particular focuses on semantic ontology technologies as evidenced in
terms such as “rdf”, “sparql”, “semant-”, “ontolog-”, “queri-” and

Table 5
OGD topic labelling and concept framing.
Concept framing (Topic
labelling)

Topic

Topic proportion
(%)

Transparency/Collaboration/
Participation
Technology

Topic 4, Topic 8, Topic 9,
Topic 14,
Topic 2, Topic 3, Topic 5,
Topic 6, Topic 7, Topic 17,
Topic 18, Topic 19
Topic 1, Topic 8, Topic 10,
Topic 14, Topic 15, Topic 16
Topic 11, Topic 12, Topic
13, Topic 14, Topic 16

12.5

Economic/Social/Innovation
Citizen engagement

50.0

18.75
18.75

FOI requests and disclosures. The law, as already explained in the introduction, is a major driving force behind the FOI campaign. Finally,
rows 3 and 4 label topics that cover a number of other key issues such as
FOI service provision, and health and environmental issues respectively.
It can be recognized that Topics 1, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 15, 16, 18 and 21
embody themes that relate to most of the key principles in FOI. For
instance, Topic 1 addresses the issue of access to mug shots information
which so often raises conﬂicting issues about privacy on one hand, and
access, disclosures and exemptions on the other hand. Topic 1 speciﬁcally points to the many instances of legal tussles fought in US. courts
regarding whether or not there should be exemptions to requests for
mug shot booking information. Terms such as “privaci-”, “mug”, “interest”, “disclosure”, “exempt”, “crimin-” and “law” capture the sentiments surrounding the issue particularly the controversy about some
companies proﬁting from the sale of mugshot photos (Rostron, 2013) –
an attack on individual privacy. While Topic 6 focuses on general FOI
requests and the law at federal and provincial levels in Canada, topic 7
with terms such as “media”, “journalist”, “fee”, “waiver” and “blog”,
appears to be addressing the issue of costs to requesters of freedom of
information, as evidenced in many countries including the US7. Topics
9, 10, 15, 16 and 18 also carry similar themes about FOI requests,
disclosures, access, politics and the reach of the law regarding FOI
implementations. Topic 21 with words such as “data”, “research”, “request”, “nhs”, “public” and “vexati-” seems to be addressing general
frustrations (vexations) regarding access to National Health Service
(NHS) data even for the purposes of research. Though no speciﬁc
country is mentioned in Topic 21, there appears to be a general apprehension among stakeholders regarding the use and re-use of sensitive clinical data under the FOI Geissbuhler et al. (2013), posits that
while concerns about access to clinical data is genuine and must be
regulated by governments, sharing health data advances public health
research and improves patient care.
In the category of law/legislation/exemptions, Topics 3, 12, 14, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 frame a general theme around the law, legislation, the courts, and privacy protection. Topic 12 in particular mentions
“ecthr” which is the European Court of Human Rights and therefore
appears to be case settlements regarding FOI. Topics 19 and 22 under
the same category have terms like “corrupt”, “state”, “public”, “oﬃci-”,
“convict”, “commisi-”, “court” and “legisl-” appear to be raising issues of
corruption and the need for the law to prosecute state oﬃcials implicated in corrupt deals.
669

International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

E. Aﬀul-Dadzie, A. Aﬀul-Dadzie

Table 6
Key named entities identiﬁed in the various topics.

FOI/RTI
OGD

Topics

Name entity: country/region/
city

Other Entities

Topic 1, Topic 5, Topic 6, Topic 8, Topic 11, Topic 15, Topic 16,
Topic 20; Topic 2, Topic 7, Topic 10, Topic 18, Topic 23
Topic 3, Topic 4, Topic 6, Topic 10, Topic 12, Topic 13; Topic 2,
Topic 8,

U.S, India, Canada, Africa,
London, Europe
Brazil, U.S, India, Sweden,
Europe, Australia

Politicians, citizen(s), media, journalist, wikileak, court, parliament,
nhs (National Health Service), key stone pipeline
Citizen(s), media, user, janssen

“metadata”. Semantic ontologies add value to an otherwise unconnected
data by oﬀering endless possibilities with linked data such as utilizing it
across platforms and organizations. Linked data also help in generating
data analysis, reports, publications and maps (Geiger & von Lucke,
2012; Shadbolt et al., 2012). Topics 18 and 19 also appear to mention
technological terms all related to open government data.
Geiger and von Lucke (2012) argue that, beyond the often narrowest deﬁnition of OGD which revolves around the terms Transparency, Openness, Participation and Collaboration, other terms that matter
are social innovations and economic development. In this regard, Topics 1
and 15 implicitly capture such themes in the discourses of open government data. With terms such as “gdp”, “reliabl-”, “publish”, “busi-” and
“countri-”, Topic 1 mildly seems to address the socio economic dimension of OGD and its inherent potential to trigger business innovations
among citizens (Janssen et al., 2012; Maude, 2012). The themes in
Topic 15 also appears to reinforce the social, economic and innovation
dimensions of OGD. Another concept often talked about in relation to
OGD, is citizen engagement. Topics 11, 12, 13 and 16 contain words
that seem to describe some form of government-citizen engagement.
The study further investigated whether some of the key terms as
identiﬁed in the topics correlate strongly among themselves. Terms that
are strongly associated with at least a 0.70 correlation measure were
‘access’, ‘media’, ‘exempt’, ‘innov-’, ‘transpar-’, ‘link’, ‘ogd’, ‘technolog-’,
‘dataset’ and ‘format’. Overall, the proportion of topics indicate that the
major central theme in OGD research have so far centered on technology and related issues. So much has been written on data publishing
standards and technologies especially as relating to data formats, open
linked data, the architecture and general data management standards as
used in open government data portals. The following section compares
the key themes identiﬁed in each campaign for similarities and diﬀerences. Particularly, we ﬁnd out whether there are any similarities or
diﬀerences not already mentioned in popular literature.

continue to charge fees to administer FOI requests (Goodspeed, 2011).
Again, in spite of the fact that FOI charges fees, the process of obtaining
an information is also comparatively laborious than with OGD. For
instance a requester may have to ﬁrst identify a relevant agency that
has the information, compose a formal letter, pay a request fee and
follow up on the application.6 For the most part however, OGD requesters only have to access the needed data directly from national or
city-based dedicated web portals in various data formats at no cost.
The comparison also brings to the fore similarities especially with
names of recognized stakeholders under the two campaigns. The FOI
topics make mention of names such as journalist, politicians, public ofﬁcials, citizens and by inference lawyers (from the many occurrences of
the terms, “laws” and “courts”). The topics under OGD also mentions
entity names like government, media and citizens which come close to
those identiﬁed in the FOI topics. This may seem to suggest that the two
campaigns have a similar core group of stakeholders.
6.2. Named entities: country/regional/city-based initiatives
Named Entity Recognition (NER) is an information extraction task
that seeks to identify and subsequently classify noun phrases (entities)
found in textual data (Downey, Broadhead, & Etzioni, 2007). Typically,
the noun phrases may refer to persons, locations, organizations, time,
money or any other entity of interest. In this study, the topic modelling
identiﬁed some key entities particularly location-based entities that
may be worthy of mention. These entities under FOI and OGD are
classiﬁed as named entity: country/region/city as shown in Table 6. It
must be noted that while the named entities alone would not reveal a
complete information, they often represent an activity, progress, impediment or an initiative relating to either FOI or OGD.
In FOI research, some location-based (countries, regions and cities)
entities can be recognized in the topics as observed in Table 2 and
subsequently classiﬁed in Table 6. Some of these entities are the U.S,
India, and Canada (in Topics 1, 5 and 6 respectively); Africa and Europe
(respectively in Topics 8 and 12); Delhi and London (in Topics 5 and 15).
In the case of the US as a named entity, we recognize that while numerous publications address a range of topics, most have centered on
the core issue of ‘how much’ information can be disclosed. This issue is
often contested in various levels of the US judicial system and in congressional hearings (Relly & Schwalbe, 2016). On India, much of the
FOI articles have focused on the law, access, and the impact of FOI on
ﬁghts against corruption in public oﬃce (Calland & Bentley, 2013;
Roberts, 2010). Other entities refer to key FOI stakeholders such as the
media, journalists, politicians, citizen, parliament, courts, library, etc. The
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), WikiLeaks are also some of
the named entities mentioned in FOI topics as shown in Table 2. Similarly in OGD research, various entities mostly location-based can be
identiﬁed in the topics generated. These are Brazil, U.S, Sweden, Australia, India and Europe. The mention of Sweden in Topic 11 in Table 3 is
not particularly surprising since most texts that trace the history of open
government often make reference to Sweden as one of the ﬁrst countries to pass a legislation over 200 years ago, to make public

6.1. Topic comparison
The topics extracted and their apparent meanings bring out several
familiar themes in FOI and OGD research. They also further reveal some
similarities and diﬀerences between the two concepts as discussed
earlier. For instance, the topics implicitly aﬃrm that the FOI campaign
has largely thrived on law whiles much of OGD’s focus has been about
open data technologies. The identiﬁed major theme in OGD research
conﬁrms the fear by Geiger and von Lucke (2012) that, care must be
taken to not narrow or reduce the focus of OGD to data access technologies. Some named entities identiﬁed in the sets of topics under FOI
and OGD, also appear to reinforce the belief that OGD has for the most
part concentrated on the use of technology whiles FOI focuses on the
law. For instance, terms (names) that refer to an individual involved in
an FOI activity, tended to use words such as citizen, public, person and
author as seen in Table 4. However in the OGD topics, the term “user”
which is predominantly used to describe a kind of computer or information systems operator such as “end-user” frequently appeared.
The topics and their subsequent labelling further reveal that, unlike
OGD that stresses on a free at no cost public data, data under FOI
cannot be said to be entirely free since requesters in most countries
including the U.S, U.K, Ireland, Australia, Canada and Scotland

6

670

https://www.icij.org/resources/2012/04/freedom-of-information.

International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

E. Aﬀul-Dadzie, A. Aﬀul-Dadzie

data free at no cost, FOI requesters are still charged requests fees even
in many advanced countries. On the other hand, OGD data sets appear
to be completely free of costs to citizens who have an added luxury of
accessing the materials in many formats. It is not clear whether the
kinds of data requested under FOI warrants the charges. The study also
shows that, comparatively, accessing an OGD data is easier than the
often strenuous processes that requesters go through to obtain FOI data.
In terms of the topic labelling, research question 3 is answered since the
use of expert knowledge and the literature helped to frame the discourses surrounding the two subjects and subsequently extracted valuable information that give a general trend of the themes in each
campaign.
Research question 4 sought to understand how named entities
identiﬁed in the topics comment about each campaign. The key named
entities give an indication for further research. For instance, a thorough
review of publications revealed that, whiles numerous country-level
FOI activities have been reported in the literature, only a few have
focused on country-to-country comparisons. It would be interesting to
see future research focus on comparing countries over some FOI performance measures such as the level of involvement by civil societies
and the media, the impact of FOI on corruption ﬁghts among others.
Though this approach should not be intended as a score card on
countries, it would give a general trend of FOI performances worldwide. Similarly, we also realized that whereas much has been written
about individual country performances, initiatives and general happenings on OGD, research seems to be silent on city or state based activities. At present, only a few OGD city-based scientiﬁc publications
have been written such as on Chicago, Vienna, Rotterdam, Bologna and
Trentino. This appears to give OGD a narrow scope since open government data is not only meant to be practiced at the level of central
governments. For instance, while over 70 international countries are
involved in OGD programmes, there are also 164 international cities
and regions practicing OGD with independently run data web portals.2,7
In view of this, future research on OGD should focus on various citybased activities to help broaden the scope and the understanding of
what OGD truly entails.

information accessible to citizens (Janssen, 2012; Mendel, 2008). One
other unique named entity appears in Topic 8 by way of “Janssen”. This
may be so because Katleen Janssen and Marijn Janssen have contributed so much to research in open government with lots of citations
between them. Two of their most cited articles are “Beneﬁts, adoption
barriers and myths of open data and open government” by Marijn and
“The inﬂuence of the PSI directive on open government data: an
overview of recent developments” by Katleen.
7. Discussion and conclusion
Several decades have passed since the freedom of information act
(FOIA) was conceived as a means to providing access to public data and
with a view to entrenching the values of democracy. After many years
of global successes and challenges in implementation, a similar movement in the form of open government data (OGD) was launched to help
support the idea of greater openness and accountability in governance.
Though run independently, the two campaigns continue to draw the
world’s attention to the importance of establishing a free accessible
public data regime to augment the values of democracy. While the two
concepts continue to receive considerable attention, the major themes
that run in scientiﬁc written discourses have not clearly emerged. In
this paper, topic modelling, text mining and document analysis
methods were harnessed to determine the major topics running through
FOI and OGD research publications and to establish whether these
central themes help frame the ideologies in the two concepts.
The text analysis approach used in this comparative bibliometric
analysis is a departure from traditional approaches where manual
document analysis methods are used in extracting the metrics. In addition, traditional literature review approaches habitually tends to
focus on information such as yearly number of publications, citation
index, leading authors and aﬃliations, top journals and domain areas.
Text analysis methods are now providing a computational alternative to
bibliometric analysis through document authorship attribution, language identiﬁcation, document retrieval and clustering.
The topic modelling not only helped in establishing the central
themes in FOI and OGD research but also helped to clearly deﬁne similarities and diﬀerences in the two campaigns. The topic classiﬁcation
was carried out to determine the proportion of topics that fall under
each of the labels. Since the topic labels mostly reﬂected key concepts
in each campaign, a topic label with a signiﬁcant proportion of the
overall topics, give an indication of the central theme in that subject. In
this respect, the results indicated that the central theme in FOI research
have largely centered around issues of disclosure, publishing, access and
cost of requests. The next major theme identiﬁed in FOI research hovers
around issues of the law, legislation and exemptions relating to the FOI
act. These two themes closely reﬂect most of the guiding principles in
FOI as particularly enshrined in Article 19 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. On the other hand, the major theme in OGD research
as shown in the topics seems to center on technology and related subjects. The next major running theme on OGD research is about issues
relating to citizen engagements. Unlike FOI, the major themes identiﬁed in OGD research do not closely reﬂect much of its touted principles
and key operational terms. This is because the topic label Transparency/
Collaboration/Participation which are terms which have mostly occasioned the OGD campaign, conspicuously had very few proportion of
the topics. This reinforces the point that much of the focus on OGD
research have been on technological issues relating to data access and
management of public data.
In respect of research question 2, the results by the topic modelling
particularly revealed some other diﬀerences between freedom of information and open government data that have not yet been mentioned
in the literature like those addressed by Geiger and von Lucke (2012),
Janssen (2012) and Ubaldi (2013). One of such diﬀerence identiﬁed in
this study, is the issue of cost to an individual accessing a public data.
Though the focus in the two campaigns is to progressively make public

References
Aﬀul-Dadzie, E., Nabareseh, S., Oplatková, Z. K., & Klímek, P. (2016). Framing media
coverage of the 2014 sony pictures entertainment hack: A topic modelling approach.
Proceedings of the 11th international conference on cyber warfare and security:
ICCWS2016. Academic Conferences and publishing limited (p. 1).
Aggarwal, C. C., & Zhai, C. (2012). Mining text data. Springer Science & Business Media.
Aghaei Chadegani, A., Salehi, H., Yunus, M. M., Farhadi, H., Fooladi, M., Farhadi, M.,
et al. (2013). A comparison between two main academic literature collections: Web
of science and Scopus databases. Asian Social Science, 9(5), 18–26.
Attard, J., Orlandi, F., Scerri, S., & Auer, S. (2015). A systematic review of open government data initiatives. Government Information Quarterly, 32(4), 399–418. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2015.07.006.
Bíró, I., Szabó, J., & Benczúr, A. A. (2008). Latent dirichlet allocation in web spam ﬁltering. Proceedings of the 4th ACM international workshop on adversarial information
retrieval on the web, 29–32.
Berners-Lee, T. (2006). Linked data-design issues. http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/
LinkedData.html.
Birkinshaw, P. (2010). Freedom of information and its impact in the United Kingdom.
Government Information Quarterly, 27(4), 312–321. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.
2010.06.006.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3(January), 993–1022.
Blei, D. M. (2012). Probabilistic topic models. Communications of the ACM, 55(4), 77–84.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2133806.2133826.
Camaj, L. (2016). From ‘window dressing’to ‘door openers’? Freedom of Information
legislation, public demand, and state compliance in South East Europe. Government
Information Quarterly, 33(2), 346–357. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2016.03.001.
Carrasco, C., & Sobrepere, X. (2015). Open government data an assessment of the spanish
municipal situation. Social Science Computer Review, 33(5), 631–644. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/0894439314560678.
Chang, J., Gerrish, S., Wang, C., Boyd-Graber, J. L., & Blei, D. M. (2009). Reading tea
leaves: How humans interpret topic models. Proceedings in Advances in Neural

7

671

https://www.data.gov/open-gov/.

International Journal of Information Management 37 (2017) 664–672

E. Aﬀul-Dadzie, A. Aﬀul-Dadzie

Dirichlet allocation and AdaBoost. Proceedings of 2012 IEEE conference on intelligence
and security informatics, 102–107.
Relly, J. E., & Schwalbe, C. B. (2016). How business lobby networks shaped the US
Freedom of Information Act: An examination of 60years of congressional testimony.
Government Information Quarterly, 33(3), 404–416. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.
2016.05.002.
Roberts, A. (2010). A great and revolutionary law? The ﬁrst four years of India’s Right to
Information Act. Public Administration Review, 70(6), 925–933. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/j.1540-6210.2010.02224.x.
Rostron, A. (2013). The mugshot industry: Freedom of speech, rights of publicity, and the
controversy sparked by an unusual new type of business. Washington University Law
Review, 90(4).
Schartum, D. W. (1998). Access to government-held information: Challenges and possibilities. The Journal of Information, Law and Technology. http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/
fac/soc/law/elj/jilt/1998_1/schartum/.
Shadbolt, N., O'Hara, K., Berners-Lee, T., Gibbins, N., Glaser, H., & Hall, W. (2012).
Linked open government data: Lessons from data.gov.uk. IEEE Intelligent Systems,
27(3), 16–24.
Shepherd, E., Stevenson, A., & Flinn, A. (2009). The impact of freedom of information on
records management and record use in local government: A literature review. Journal
of the Society of Archivists, 30(2), 227–248. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
00379810903445000.
Tauberer, J. (2012). History of the movement. Open government data: The bookhttps://
opengovdata.io/2014/history-the-movement/.
Tinati, R., Carr, L., Halford, S., & Pope, C. (2012). Exploring the impact of adopting open
data in the UK government. Digital futures. Aberdeen, GB: Web & Internet Science 3pp.
US. Senate (2007). Open government: Reinvigorating the freedom of information act: Hearing
before the committee on the judiciary, United States senate, one hundred tenth congress,
ﬁrst session, march 14, 2007. Washington: U.S. G.P.O. DIANE Publishing. https://
www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-110shrg35801/pdf/CHRG-110shrg35801.pdf.
Ubaldi, B. (2013). Open government data: Towards empirical analysis of open government
data initiatives. Paris, France: OECD.
Van Dooren, W., Bouckaert, G., & Halligan, J. (2015). Performance management in the
public sector. Routledge.
Veljković, N., Bogdanović-Dinić, S., & Stoimenov, L. (2014). Benchmarking open government: An open data perspective. Government Information Quarterly, 31(2),
278–290. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2013.10.011.
Wang, C., & Blei, D. M. (2011). Collaborative topic modeling for recommending scientiﬁc
articles. Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge
discovery and data mining (pp. 448–456).
Wang, H. J., & Lo, J. (2016). Adoption of open government data among government
agencies. Government Information Quarterly, 33(1), 80–88. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.giq.2015.11.004.
Wang, Q., & Waltman, L. (2016). Large-scale analysis of the accuracy of the journal
classiﬁcation systems of Web of Science and Scopus. Journal of Informetrics, 10(2),
347–364. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.joi.2016.02.003.
Wei, X., & Croft, W. B. (2006). LDA-based document models for ad-hoc retrieval.
Proceedings of the 29th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on research and
development in information retrieval, 178–185.
Weisberg, H. F., & Nawara, S. P. (2010). How sophistication aﬀected the 2000 presidential vote: Traditional sophistication measures versus conceptualization. Political
Behavior, 32(4), 547–565. http://www.jstor.org/stable/40960954.
Whitmore, A. (2012). Extracting knowledge from US department of defense freedom of
information act requests with social media. Government Information Quarterly, 29(2),
151–157.
Witten, I. H. (2005). Text mining. Practical handbook of internet computing, 14-1. CRCcomputer-and-information-science-series/book-series/CHCOMINFSCI. Chapman-Hall.
Xing, D., & Girolami, M. (2007). Employing latent Dirichlet allocation for fraud detection
in telecommunications. Pattern Recognition Letters, 28(13), 1727–1734. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.patrec.2007.04.015.
Yau, C. K., Porter, A., Newman, N., & Suominen, A. (2014). Clustering scientiﬁc documents with topic modeling. Scientometrics, 100(3), 767–786. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s11192-014-1321-8.
Zeleti, F. A., Ojo, A., & Curry, E. (2016). Exploring the economic value of open government data. Government Information Quarterly, 33(3), 535–551. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.giq.2016.01.008.
Zuiderwijk, A., & Janssen, M. (2014). The negative eﬀects of open government datainvestigating the dark side of open data. Proceedings of the 15th ACM annual international conference on digital government research, 147–152.

Information Processing Systems, 288–296.
Charalabidis, Y., Alexopoulos, C., & Loukis, E. (2016). A taxonomy of open government
data research areas and topics. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic
Commerce, 26(1–2), 41–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10919392.2015.1124720.
Chignard, S. (2013). A brief history of open data. Paris Tech Review29.
DiMaggio, P., Nag, M., & Blei, D. (2013). Exploiting aﬃnities between topic modeling and
the sociological perspective on culture: Application to newspaper coverage of US
government arts funding. Poetics, 41(6), 570–606. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
poetic.2013.08.004.
Donnelly, J. (2013). Universal human rights in theory and practice. Cornell University Press.
Downey, D., Broadhead, M., & Etzioni, O. (2007). Locating complex named entities in
web text. Proceedings of International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI),
2733–2739.
Evans, A. M., & Campos, A. (2013). Open government initiatives: Challenges of citizen
participation. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 32(1), 172–185. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1002/pam.21651.
Foerstel, H. N. (1999). Freedom of information and the right to know: The origins and applications of the Freedom of Information Act. Greenwood Publishing Group.
Frey, L. (2014). Open government partnership four-year strategy 2015–2018. http://www.
opengovpartnership.org/sites/default/ﬁles/attachments/4YearAP-Online.pdf.
Geiger, C. P., & von Lucke, J. (2012). Open government and (linked)(open)(government)
(data). JeDEM-eJournal of eDemocracy and Open Government, 4(2), 265–278.
Geissbuhler, A., Safran, C., Buchan, I., Bellazzi, R., Labkoﬀ, S., Eilenberg, K., et al. (2013).
Trustworthy reuse of health data: A transnational perspective. International Journal of
Medical Informatics, 82(1), 1–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.11.003.
Gigler, B. S., Custer, S., & Rahemtulla, H. (2011). Realizing the vision of open government
data: Opportunities, challenges, and pitfalls. World Bank.
Halstuk, M. E., & Chamberlin, B. F. (2006). The Freedom of Information Act 1966–2006:
A retrospective on the rise of privacy protection over the public interest in knowing
what the government’s up to. Communication Law and Policy, 11(4), 511–564. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15326926clp1104_3.
Power, voting, and voting power. In M. J. Holler (Ed.), Springer Science & Business
Media.
Hubbard, P. (2008). China’s regulations on open government information: Challenges of
nationwide policy implementation. Open Government: a Journal on Freedom of
Information, 4(1), 1–34.
Janssen, M., Charalabidis, Y., & Zuiderwijk, A. (2012). Beneﬁts, adoption barriers and
myths of open data and open government. Information Systems Management, 29(4),
258–268.
Janssen, K. (2012). Open government data and the right to information: Opportunities
and obstacles. The Journal of Community Informatics, 8(2).
Jetzek, T., Avital, M., & Bjørn-Andersen, N. (2012). The value of open government data: A
strategic analysis framework. Proceedings of the 2012 pre-ICIS workshop.
Jiang, H., Qiang, M., & Lin, P. (2016). A topic modeling based bibliometric exploration of
hydropower research. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 57, 226–237.
Krishnamurthy, R., & Awazu, Y. (2016). Liberating data for public value: The case of data.
gov. International Journal of Information Management, 36(4), 668–672.
Lathrop, D., & Ruma, L. (2010). Open government: Collaboration, transparency, and participation in practice. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Lau, R. R., Patel, P., Fahmy, D. F., & Kaufman, R. R. (2014). Correct voting across thirtythree democracies: A preliminary analysis. British Journal of Political Science, 44(02),
239–259.
Mann, G. S., Mimno, D., & McCallum, A. (2006). Bibliometric impact measures leveraging
topic analysis. Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on digital libraries,
65–74.
Maskeri, G., Sarkar, S., & Heaﬁeld, K. (2008). Mining business topics in source code using
latent dirichlet allocation. Proceedings of the 1st India software engineering conference
(pp. 113–120).
Maude, F. (2012). Open data white paper-unleashing the potential. the stationary oﬃce limited
on behalf of HM government. London, United Kingdom: Cabinet Oﬃce.
Mendel, T. (2008). Freedom of information: A comparative legal survey. Paris: Unesco.
Novais, T., de Albuquerque, J. P., & da Silva Craveiro, G. (2013). An account of research on
open government data (2007–2012): A systematic literature review. EGOV/ePart ongoing
research (pp. 76–83).
Owen, G. T. (2014). Qualitative methods in higher education policy analysis: Using interviews and document analysis. The Qualitative Report, 19(26), 1.
Ríos, S. A., Aguilera, F., Bustos, F., Omitola, T., & Shadbolt, N. (2013). Leveraging social
network analysis with topic models and the Semantic Web (extended). Web
Intelligence and Agent Systems: An International Journal, 11(4), 303–314.
Ramanathan, V., & Wechsler, H. (2012). Phishing Website detection using latent

672

