D

Determinants of Tax
Compliance Attitude
Godfred Matthew Yaw Owusu,
Rita Amoah Bekoe, Octavia Ama Serwaa Otchere
and Nana Adwoa Anokye Effah
Department of Accounting, University of Ghana
Business School, University of Ghana, Accra,
Ghana

Synonyms
Tax; levy, tariff, duty, tribute; Compliance; conformity, abidance, obedience, adherence,
observance

Definition
Tax compliance is the manner and extent to which
individuals adhere to the applicable tax laws in
their country of residence.

Introduction
The socioeconomic development of every nation
depends substantially on its capacity to generate
enough revenue to ﬁnance its developmental projects. One of the major avenues for revenue generation for development is through taxation.
Notwithstanding the fact that taxes constitute an

important source of revenue to governments, it
has been a huge challenge for many governments
and tax authorities in practice to convince all
individual taxpayers to meet their tax obligations
to the state (McGee et al. 2008). Governments all
over the world are confronted with the challenge
of dealing with tax non-compliance issues which
have been on the ascendency for decades. Despite
the efforts by most governments in reforming the
tax systems, available statistics on the amount of
revenue lost to countries due to non-compliance
with tax laws suggest widespread evasion of tax in
many parts of the world.
A report by the Tax Justice Network suggests
that governments worldwide lose more than $3.1
trillion in annual revenue due to tax evasion, while
it is estimated the equivalent of more than 5.1% of
global gross domestic product (GDP) never
reaches the coffers of 145 national governments
in the form of taxes (Cobham and Janský 2017).
The United States alone loses over $600 billion
revenue to tax evasion each year (Cebula and
Feige 2012), while the European Union loses
between €50 and €70 billion of tax revenue to
tax evasion annually (Carrero and Seara 2016).
In Africa, the continent loses close to $14 billion
revenue to tax evasion annually (Mwanza 2016).
To reduce the incidence of tax evasion and
enhance the revenue mobilization effort of countries, several initiatives including tax audits and
enactment of laws to punish offenders among
others have been experimented by many governments. These initiatives in most cases have

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019
A. Farazmand (ed.), Global Encyclopedia of Public Administration, Public Policy, and Governance,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-31816-5_3859-1

2

focused on ensuring compulsory compliance with
tax provisions. Notwithstanding its perceived
beneﬁts, measures aimed at enforcing compliance
with tax provisions have been criticized for its
minimal impact on taxpayers’ compliance attitude. As argued by social psychologists, tax compliance can be achieved without the use of any
form of force by tax ofﬁcials. In line with this
belief, Mohdali and Pope (2012) suggest the
need to focus on sociopsychological factors in
explaining tax compliance behavior on the basis
that residents of the country feel obligated to do so
and not for the fear of repercussions of
non-compliance.
Accordingly, several studies seeking to understand the tax compliance behavior of individuals
have emerged over the years (Wahl et al. 2010).
These studies argue that factors such as tax knowledge, trust in authority, ethics, education, and
social norms are relevant in explaining tax compliance behavior of individuals. Thus, a multiplicity of factors may explain the tax compliance
behavior of individuals, and these factors may
vary based on context.
By relying on the framework of Mohdali and
Pope (2012), the current study examines the tax
compliance attitude of a section of Ghanaians
highlighting the dominant factors that inﬂuence
tax compliance attitudes. The study examines
whether the perception individuals have toward
the government (in terms of utilization of tax
revenue), the attitude of the tax authorities toward
taxpayers, and other demographic characteristics
of the respondents including their level of tax
knowledge and religiosity have any implications
on their tax compliance behavior. While the work
of Mohdali and Pope (2012) was conducted in a
Muslim-dominated environment, this study provides some evidence from a Christian-dominated
country (Population and Housing Census 2010).

Literature Review
Tax Compliance and Theories of Compliance
“Questions about tax compliance are as old as
taxes themselves and will remain an area of discovery as long as taxes exist” (Torgler 2006,

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude

p.82). While most researchers in the area of taxation view compliance as a measure of taxpayers’
conformity to tax rules as well as regulations,
others explain compliance to involve the ﬁling of
requisite tax returns at the right time, and accurately reporting one’s tax liability in accordance
with the applicable laws. Tax compliance as a
concept is therefore about individuals and how
they adhere to the applicable tax laws in their
country of residence.
Critical to the tax compliance discourse is the
attitude of taxpayers toward paying taxes. Several
studies have examined the factors that inﬂuence tax
compliance behavior of people. Eriksen and Fallan
(1996), for instance, argue that the tax compliance
attitude of an individual is usually a function of that
individual’s knowledge of tax regulations and their
economic effect and conclude that knowledge of
tax laws reduces the propensity not to comply with
tax provisions. Other factors including the perception of fairness in the use of tax revenue, social
norms, education, ethical conduct, trust in tax
authorities, personal characteristics of the individual taxpayer, etc. have been associated with tax
compliance attitude. Studies have examined these
factors under the lenses of the economic deterrence
model, social psychological model, and the ﬁscal
psychological model.
The economic deterrence theory is primarily
based on the economic theory of compliance with
a focus on deterrence be it persuasive or punitive.
Its foundation is based on the measures aimed at
preventing taxpayers from evading. The assumption is that taxpayers pay their taxes largely due to
the fear of being detected and penalized for noncompliance. Thus, a rational taxpayer will evade
tax if the expected cost of being detected is lower
than the payoff from evading.
The social psychological theory, however, suggests that tax compliance is inﬂuenced by two main
factors: trust in authorities and power of authorities.
Wahl et al. (2010) explain trust in authorities to
mean the general belief that tax authorities work in
the best interest of everyone, while the concept of
“power of authorities” describes the taxpayers’
perception of the potential of the tax ofﬁcial to
detect and punish acts of tax evasion. While trust

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude

enhances voluntary tax compliance, enforced compliance is achieved by increasing levels of power.
The ﬁscal psychological model suggests compliance behavior is inﬂuenced by three factors: tax
mentality, tax tension feeling, and tax morale. Tax
mentality is the taxpayer’s decision to comply or
otherwise based on personal experience and the
social environment. Tax tension feeling refers to
the taxpayer dissatisfaction with the tax system
and the propensity not to comply with tax obligations, while tax morale is explained to mean the
intrinsic motive (resulting from religious principles and his moral values). By employing the
ﬁscal psychological model, we examine whether
taxpayers’ prior experiences with tax authorities
(mentality), their feeling about the tax system
(proxied by how they perceive the government
and the utilization of the tax revenue), and the
intrinsic motive (proxied by religiosity) affect
their tax compliance attitude.
Religiosity and Tax Compliance Attitude
Religiosity is the commitment and the application
of one’s faith, commonly classiﬁed into intrinsic
and extrinsic components. Extrinsic religiosity is
explained as a means to an end, where religion
serves a means of obtaining social acceptance and
reward. Intrinsic religiosity on the other hand is an
end in itself where an individual is committed to his
religion and internalizes his religious beliefs
(Torgler 2006). An extrinsically inspired individual
uses his religion to acquire comfort and security
and to experience a sense of belongingness, while
an intrinsically inspired individual strives to live
and practice his religion as an essential part of
his life.
Religiosity has been examined on several issues
including moral judgments, ethics, norms, and personality traits. Some limited attempts have also
been made to link religiosity to tax compliance
behavior. Torgler (2006), for instance, assessed
the relationship between tax morale (intrinsic
motive to pay tax) and religiosity and found a
positive relationship between them. Mohdali and
Pope (2012), however, found that the willingness
to honor tax obligations is largely driven by the
intrinsic religiosity and not extrinsic. To them, religion reinforces an individual’s moral and ethical

3

perception, fortiﬁes his “sense of obligation,” and
eventually improves his tax compliance attitude.
Perception Toward Government and Tax
Compliance Attitude
Governance plays a critical role in inﬂuencing tax
compliance attitude of people. Fauvelle-Aymar
(1999) points out that three factors, legitimacy,
efﬁciency, and credibility of a government, are
critical in shaping the attitude of taxpayers to
comply with the tax provisions in a country.
Thus, the willingness to comply with tax provisions may be dependent on whether the citizens
view the government of the day to be legitimate or
otherwise, approve of the government’s actions
and have trust in the governance systems. Where
citizens presume the government to be illegal and
not credible, the motivation to comply with tax
provision is likely to be low. Thus, the perception
of the citizenry toward the government may inﬂuence their tax compliance behavior.
The argument has been that taxation constitutes
one of the important sources of revenue by which
government ﬁnances its projects and hence, most
citizens usually expect the government to be
accountable in the administration of the tax revenue
through the provision of social amenities in a costeffective way. The tendency to oppose the payment
of tax is usually high if taxpayers cannot match the
responsibility to pay tax with government effort in
addressing their infrastructural needs. As Feld and
Frey (2007) point out, citizens in most instances are
willing to honor their tax obligations if public services provided by the government can be matched
equitably with the taxes. Where this expectation of
the citizen is not met, compliance becomes an issue.
Thus, tax compliance attitude is more likely to be
positive when citizens can see its manifestation in a
form of provision of essential amenities for the
public good.
Attitude of Tax Authority Toward Taxpayers
Governments worldwide appoint a relevant
authority to be in charge of its tax administration.
While studies on compliance behavior have often
focused on studying the behavior of taxpayers,
important insights could be gained on the tax
compliance discourse by taking a critical look at

4

the behavior of the tax authorities and their dealings with the taxpayer. According to Muehlbacher
and Kirchler (2010), a healthy interaction between
tax authorities and taxpayers enhances cooperation of the latter in complying with their tax obligations. It is believed that the manner in which the
tax authority treats taxpayers has important implications on their willingness to pay their taxes and
their tax morale. This is why Feld and Frey (2007)
suggest the need for the tax authority to be tactful
in dealing with taxpayers as it constitutes one of
the important means of inducing compliance. To
them, it is more prudent for the tax authority to
adopt a respectful approach in dealing with taxpayers as it serves as an incentive to comply with
tax laws.
Wahl et al. (2010) describe two forms of relationship (antagonistic and synergistic) that can
exist between the tax authority and the taxpayer
in the famous slippery slope framework. In an
antagonistic environment, both parties see each
other as “opponents.” Since taxpayers in this environment are hesitant in honoring their tax obligations, the tax authority is always on the lookout for
evaders. In the synergistic environment however,
it is presumed that a combined effort of both the
taxpayers and the tax authority is crucial in ensuring an effective tax system. As a result, the tax
authority views it necessary to give off their best
by treating taxpayers with trust and respect. Thus,
the type of relationship that exists between the
parties involved in the administration of tax is
relevant in shaping tax compliance behavior.

Methodology
Design, Research Instrument, and Data
Collection
The survey-based method of research was
adopted with questionnaires as the principal
means of data collection. Printed questionnaires
were administered to the respondents in class during the second semester of the 2017/2018 academic year. To ensure voluntary participation
and elicit honest response; the students were
assured of the conﬁdentiality of their responses
which were to be used for the purposes of the

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude

study only. The questionnaire used consisted of
two sections. The ﬁrst section sought the views of
respondents on tax compliance attitude and the
factors that inﬂuence such attitudes (religiosity,
perception of government spending, attitude of
tax authorities) using a seven-point Likert scale
(where 1 represents a strong disagreement and
7 represents a strong agreement) to the statements
used. The speciﬁc items used in measuring each of
the construct were adapted from the work of
Mohdali and Pope (2012).
Respondents
A total of 400 valid responses were used for the
analysis made up of 258 postgraduate business
students and 142 nonbusiness students. The sample
had an equal distribution of males and females as
the males outnumbered the females by a difference
of 12. More than half of the respondents were
between the ages of 25 and 30 (57.5%), and their
religious background suggests majority of them are
Christians (76.3%). Table 1 presents details of the
demographic characteristics of the respondents.

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude,
Table 1 Descriptive summary of demographics
Variables
Gender
Male
Female
Age
25–30
31–35
36–40
41–45
Course major
Business
Nonbusiness
Religious background
Christian
Islam
National pride
Not proud of Ghana
Proud of Ghana

Frequency

Percent

206
194

51.5
48.5

230
98
49
23

57.5
24.5
12.3
5.8

258
142

64.5
35.5

305
95

76.3
23.8

97
303

24.3
75.8

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude

5

Data Analysis Procedures
An exploratory factor analysis was initially
conducted on the study constructs to examine
their dimensionality. Regression analysis was
subsequently employed to ascertain whether the
variables of interest were good predictors of the
tax compliance attitude of the respondents.
Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA)
The principal component extraction criterion
using the varimax rotation method was employed
for EFA. The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin values for each
construct exceeded the 0.7 threshold, indicating
sampling adequacy (Kaiser 1974). Bartlett’s test
of sphericity also yielded very signiﬁcant and
satisfactory results, a conﬁrmation that the data
set was ﬁt to conduct EFA. The EFA results
yielded two factors for both “tax compliance
Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude,
Table 2 Rotated factor matrix on tax compliance attitude
Indicators
It is my duty as a citizen to pay taxes as
required by the law
I pay taxes as required by the law to
support the country
Citizenship carries with it a duty to
pay tax
I pay my taxes as required by the law
because of a sense of responsibility
It makes it difﬁcult to govern the
country when people don’t pay their
tax
I pay my taxes as required because
I know that I will be audited
I prepare my tax return correctly
because I fear my reputation would be
ruined if I were to get caught for not
following the tax laws
Not paying taxes is one of the worst
crime a person can commit because it
harms the whole community
The harm to the community through
people not paying tax is regretful
If everyone paid the correct amount of
tax, we would enjoy better public
facilities
Eigen values
Percentage of variance explained

Component
1
2
0.87
0.84
0.79
0.65
0.59

0.72
0.71

0.65

0.56
0.52

4.06
33.81

1.80
15.01

attitude” and “religiosity,” while three factors
emerged from the construct “perception toward
government.” A summary of the EFA results is
presented in Tables 2, 3, and 4.

Regression Results and Discussions
Table 5 presents results from the regression analysis using the Ordinary Least Square (OLS) estimation technique. The results show the effect of
the variables of interest: perception toward government, attitude of tax authority, religiosity, and
control variables (national pride and course
major) on tax compliance attitude. There are two
different regression outputs as shown in Table 5.
Model 1 of Table 5 shows the relationship
between the independent variables and voluntary
tax compliance attitude, while Model 2 contains
results based on enforced tax compliance attitude.
Determinants of Tax Compliance
Table 3 Rotated factor matrix on religiosity
Indicators
I rarely read books and magazines
about my faith
I rarely join the activities of my
religious organization
I rarely try to live all my life according
to my religious beliefs
I do not enjoy spending time with
others of my religious afﬁliation
It doesn’t matter much what I believe so
long as I am good
Religious beliefs do not inﬂuence most
of my dealings in life
My whole approach to life is based on
my religion
I keep well informed about my local
religious group and have some
inﬂuence on its decisions
It is important for me to spend periods
of time in private to think and reﬂect on
my religion
I spend time trying to enhance my
understanding of my faith
Eigen values
Percentage of variance explained

Attitude,

Component
1
2
0.81
0.79
0.71
0.69
0.68
0.64
0.79
0.75

0.74

0.69
3.52
1.92

35.23
19.17

6

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude,
Table 4 Rotated factor matrix on perception toward the
government
Indicators
The services provided by the
government are not
comparable with the amount
of taxes paid
Despite being able to vote,
I have no say over the
government’s decisions to
spend public funds
The government is not being
transparent in spending
taxpayers’ money
The tax laws ensure that
everyone pays a fair and
correct amount of taxes
The amount of tax expected
to be paid by all Ghanaians is
fair because it is based on
taxable income (after
allowable deductions)
I believe that the Ghanaian
government is spending
public funds prudently
Public funds are allocated
equitably for the Ghanaian
citizens’ well-being
Eigen values
Percentage of variance
explained

Component
1
2
0.78

3

0.73

0.70

0.82

0.79

Determinants of Tax Compliance
Table 5 Multiple regression results
Variables
Intrinsic
religiosity
Extrinsic
religiosity
Trust in
government
Perception of
fairness
Equitability of
government
Attitude of tax
authority toward
taxpayers
National pride
Course major
Overall model ﬁt

Model 1
0.22 (0.00)
0.03 (0.53)

Attitude,

Model 2
0.25 (0.00)
0.01 (0.82)

0.06 (0.23)

0.01 (0.91)

0.10 (0.06)

0.11 (0.04)

0.89 (0.09)

0.04 (0.50)

0.02 (0.75)

0.04 (0.44)

0.19 (0.00)
0.10 (0.04)
Adjusted
R2 = 0.12
F
(8, 391) = 7.71

0.20 (0.00)
0.08 (0.11)
Adjusted
R2 = 0.12
F
(8, 391) = 7.98

Note: P-values are in parentheses
0.89

0.75

2.21
31.53

1.65
23.63

0.90
12.90

Results of Model 1 suggest intrinsic religiosity,
perception of fairness, national pride, and course
major have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on voluntary tax
compliance attitude. A positive and highly signiﬁcant relationship (at 1% level) was found between
intrinsic religiosity and voluntary tax compliance
attitude. This demonstrates that individuals who
strive to live and practice their religion as an integral part of their daily life exhibit high tax compliance attitude voluntarily. Extrinsic religiosity was
also positively related to tax compliance attitude
though statistically insigniﬁcant. These results
demonstrate that religiosity plays an important
role on tax compliance attitude. As argued by
existing studies (Mohdali and Pope 2012; Torgler
2006), religion imposes a sense of moral and

ethical responsibility on an individual which
improves tax compliance attitude.
The results also show that when individuals
perceive the tax system to be fair, the motivation
to comply with tax is high. Impliedly, individuals
are more willing to honor their tax obligations
when they have conﬁdence in the authenticity of
the tax system. Course major was negative and
statistically signiﬁcant, an indication that business
students have higher compliance attitude than
nonbusiness students. As a proxy for tax knowledge, this ﬁnding suggests that higher level of tax
knowledge has a positive inﬂuence on compliance
attitude as shown by some empirical studies (Ali
and Ahmad 2014; Eriksen and Fallan 1996).
Using enforced compliance as the dependent
variable produced similar results as the voluntary
compliance. As shown in Model 2, intrinsic religiosity, perception of fairness, and national pride were
found to be full predictors of enforced tax compliance attitude. Taken together, results of both models
indicate that the intrinsic component of religiosity,
perceive fairness of the tax system, national pride,
and knowledge on tax laws are the main determinants of tax compliance attitude of people.

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude

Conclusion
Taxes remain one of the most effective means by
which nations mobilize internal resources for
growth and development. In reality however, it
has been a huge challenge for most governments
as well as tax authorities to convince individual
taxpayers to honor their tax obligations to the
state. Consequently, studies aimed at identifying
the determinants of tax compliance attitude have
emerged in recent times. This study contributes to
extant literature on tax compliance by examining
the inﬂuence of religiosity, perception toward
government, and attitude of tax authority toward
taxpayers on tax compliance attitude.
Findings of this study showed that religiosity
as a generic term has an impact on tax compliance
attitude. Speciﬁcally, the intrinsic component of
religiosity as intrapersonal religiosity has a positive and statistically signiﬁcant inﬂuence on tax
compliance attitude. Further, the perception of
taxpayers toward the government (in terms of
equitability of government and fairness of the
tax system) was also found to be positively associated with tax compliance attitude. Again, an
individual’s knowledge level and the extent to
which citizens are proud of their country have
important implications on their tax compliance
attitude.
These ﬁndings therefore imply that, as part of
the broad strategy of government to inﬂuence
voluntary tax compliance attitude, it is important
to promote religious values among taxpayers.
Religious teachings should therefore be geared
toward establishing the importance of honoring
one’s civic responsibilities especially with the
issue of taxation which forms one of the most
important civic responsibilities. By so doing individuals will voluntarily comply with their tax
obligations.
Even though “nobody likes paying taxes”
(Feld and Frey 2007 p.105), individuals upon
realizing the effective mobilization of government
revenues will be inclined to honor their tax obligations. Public services provided by the government therefore ought to substantially amount to
tax payments. Also, the tax structure should be
segregated on fair bases such that no one pays

7

more or less tax than expected. These constructive
measures will go a long way to positively inﬂuence taxpayers’ compliance attitude.
In addition, tax education should be promoted
in the various colleges. It is important for students
to be exposed to the tax structure of the country
irrespective of whether or not they are pursuing a
business-related course. By so doing they will be
highly informed about how the tax system
operates and also the socioeconomic developments that have come about as a result of effective
utilization of the tax revenue. This will help individuals better appreciate the importance of paying
taxes to the state.
In spite of the signiﬁcant contribution of this
study, the ﬁndings are limited in some respects.
First, the respondents of this study were students
from only one public university among the many
universities in Ghana, and this could affect the
extent of generalization of results. The use of
students from various universities, both public
and private, in the country could improve the
generalization of results. Second, this study
focused mainly on income tax to examine the
taxpayers’ compliance attitude. Future researches
may include other forms of taxes, such as corporate tax, gift tax, and value-added tax among
others, to enhance existing literature on taxation
issues. Future studies may also explore the issue
qualitatively to provide a deeper understanding of
the determinants of tax compliance attitude.

Cross-References
▶ Tax Compliance Attitude: Tax Expenditure,
Tax Evasion, Tax Administration, Tax Practices, Taxation Policymaking

References
Ali A, Ahmad N (2014) Trust and tax compliance among
Malaysian working youth. Int J Public Adm
37(1):37–41
Carrero JMC, Seara AQ (2016) The concept of ‘aggressive
tax planning’ launched by the OECD and the EU Commission in the BEPS era: redeﬁning the border between

8
legitimate and illegitimate tax planning. Intertax
44(3):206–226
Cebula RJ, Feige EL (2012) America’s underground economy: measuring the size, growth and determinants of
income tax evasion in the U.S. Crime Law Soc Chang
57(3):265–285
Cobham A, Janský P (2017) Global distribution of revenue
loss from tax avoidance. United Nations University,
WIDER Working paper 55
Eriksen K, Fallan L (1996) Tax knowledge and attitudes
towards taxation; A report on a quasi-experiment.
J Econ Psychol 17(3):387–402
Fauvelle-Aymar C (1999) The political and tax capacity of
government in developing countries. Kyklos
52(3):391–413
Feld LP, Frey BS (2007) Tax compliance as the result of a
psychological tax contract: the role of incentives and
responsive regulation. Law Policy 29(1):102–120
Kaiser HF (1974) An index of factorial simplicity.
Psychometrika 39(1):31–36

Determinants of Tax Compliance Attitude
McGee RW, Ho SSM, Li AYS (2008) A comparative study
on perceived ethics of tax evasion: Hong Kong vs the
United States. J Bus Ethics 77(2):147–158
Mohdali R, Pope JEFF (2012) The effects of religiosity and
external environment on voluntary tax compliance. N Z
J Tax Law Policy 18(2):119–139
Muehlbacher S, Kirchler E (2010) Tax compliance by trust
and power of authorities. Int Econ J 24(4):607–610
Mwanza K (2016) Retrieved 18 Sept 2018 from https://
moguldom.com/132671
The 2010 Population and Housing Census retrieved 4 Nov
2018 from http://www.statsghana.gov.gh
Torgler B (2006) The importance of faith: tax morale and
religiosity. J Econ Behav Organ 61(1):81–109
Wahl I, Kastlunger B, Kirchler E (2010) Trust in authorities
and power to enforce tax compliance: an empirical
analysis of the “slippery slope framework”. Law Policy
32(4):383–406

