Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

Improving Citizens’ Participation in Local Government
Planning and Financial Management in Ghana: A
Stakeholder Analysis of the Sefwi Wiawso Municipal
Assembly
Ahenkan Albert, Bawole N J and Domfeh K A
Department of Public Administration and Health Services Management
P. O. Box LG 78, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.
Tel: +233 24 6955 818

Received: June 01, 2013

E-mail: aahenkan@ug.edu.gh/jnbawole@ug.edu.gh

Accepted: June 13, 2013

DOI: 10.5296/jpag.v3i2.3782

Abstract
Ghana‘s decentralization concept was initiated to promote popular grassroots participation in
the management and administration of local governance institutions for improved conditions
of life. This is believed to be an important means to improving the effectiveness of service
delivery and empower the local people to participate in the development processes that affect
their lives. Despite this important role of local communities and stakeholders in the local
governance processes, their involvement in decision making on planning, budgeting and
financial management of local government agencies is only marginal. This low level of
participation is one of the most structural challenges confronting Ghana‘s decentralisation
process and local government financial management. Using Stakeholder Analysis, this paper
examines the role and level of participation of stakeholders in planning, budgeting and
financial management of the Sefwi Wiawso Municipal Assembly. The results of the study
indicate that, there has been very little space for local participation and that most of the
stakeholders lack proper understanding of the planning, budgeting and the financial
management systems of the district assemblies. This lack of space for stakeholder
participation has constrained the promotion of effective, responsive and responsible
government at the local level for poverty reduction. Procedures and structures for community
engagement in the monitoring and evaluation of development interventions seldom exist. The
paper argues that an effective engagement of local communities and other stakeholders will
enhance transparency and improve upon service delivery within the local government
systems. A conscious effort to build capacities and create space for local engagement will
enhance the efforts of decentralisation and fast track poverty reduction and national
development in Ghana.
Keywords: local government, budgeting, finances, planning, community participation,
stakeholders
191

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

1. Introduction
Ghana‘s decentralization concept was initiated to promote popular grassroots participation in
the administration of the planning, implementation, monitoring and delivery of services to
improve the living conditions of the rural poor. This link between participation and local
governance in Ghana has become an important means of improving the effectiveness of
services and empowering the local people to participate in the development processes that
affect their lives. Article 35(6)(d) of Ghana’s 1992 Constitution urges the state to make
democracy a reality by embarking on the decentralisation project to offer greater
opportunities for greater citizen participation at all levels of local decision-making. Among
the key reasons for Ghana’s decentralisation process was therefore the desire to increase
citizens’ participation in local governance. This was a deliberate and concerted effort by the
government to eradicate the economic, social, cultural and political challenges that contribute
to poverty in the country. To effectively achieve this, the district assemblies are required to
co-ordinate district level sectoral programmes/projects directed towards poverty reduction
with the active participation of the local people. Consequently, the development planning and
budgeting systems in Ghana have become bottom-up and the inputs of all stakeholders are
expected to facilitate the process of integrating stakeholder interest into the planning and
budgeting process at the district level.
It is significant to note that in all the attempts at decentralisation and local governance in
Ghana before and after independence, the role of the citizen had been paramount albeit at
different levels of zeal. Article 240 (2) (e) of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana demands that
local people are afforded the opportunities to effectively participate in the governance of the
district. Whereas arguments such as residence requirement qualification for candidacy, state
sponsorship for local elections, and the non-partisan local electoral process have been
adduced to illustrate how citizens participation is being pursued (Ahwoi 2010:166), evidence
does not seem to support the reality of active citizens participation.
Participation has been largely electoral participation of the citizenry in local government and
the incidence of effective participation of the citizenry in practice has been rather tokenistic.
Restoring the confidence of the citizens in local government and the decentralised process in
Ghana requires major attempts to drag in the citizens’ to participate not only in elections but
also in its active workings. In this regard, citizens’ participation in planning and budgeting in
particular, and financial administration in general has been recommended. Section 16 of the
Local Government Act 1993 states that elected Assembly members are required to:
meet his [sic] electorate before each meeting of the District Assembly’; ‘maintain close
contact with his electoral area, consult his people on issues to be discussed in the District
Assembly and collate their views, opinions and proposals . . . and present [these] to the
District Assembly’; ‘report to his electorate the general decisions of the District Assembly
and its Executive Committee and the actions he has taken to solve problems raised by
residents in his electoral area’.

192

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

While normative arrangements exist for the involvement of local citizens, the practicalities of
local and national conditions and the political gymnastics of actors have culminated in the
interest of locals being subdued. This paper therefore seeks to investigate the realities of
stakeholder participation in the planning and budgeting processes of the district assemblies in
Ghana using the Sefwi Wiawso District Assembly as a case study. The rest of the paper is
structured as follows: the next section reviews relevant literature on participatory planning
and budgeting; followed by a discussion of the conceptual framework of mandatory and
permissive stakeholder analysis. This is then followed by the methodology, findings and
discussion of results. The final section provides some recommendations for policy actions to
improve local participation in the planning and budgeting process of the district assemblies.
2. Literature Review
The implicit assumption that decentralisation will improve participation has remained
contested as evidence from many decentralising countries point rather to a situation of only
electoral participation (Devas and Grant 2003) which have also witnessed relatively low
turnout (Ayee 2008;Ahwoi 2010). In cases where decentralisation has been a national reform
agenda, the capacity of the citizens to become active actors and hence actively participate has
been rather low plus limited opaque policy options offered to citizens to enable informed
decision making. The ability of the citizens to participate between elections has been limited
with prejudiced and sluggish consultation to say the least (Devas and Grant 2003). In some
cases, central government pretends to be decentralising while limiting capacities to engage
the citizens fully through deliberate withholding of power and resources (Crawford 2009).
However, citizens’ participation continues to take centre stage in citizens’ empowerment
debates. This is considered more critical at the local levels where decentralisation is expected
give more space for the engagement of local populations. However, the call has been to have
citizens engaged in substantive issues other than electoral participation. In this regard, the
participation of citizens in planning and budgetary processes has been identified as a key
strategy albeit controversial. In the next subsection, we take a look at participatory planning
as an avenue to have citizens take a stake in local government affairs.
2.1. Participatory Planning
Modern democracies are better described as representative or indirect where citizens’
involvement or participation is limited to the act of voting and deciding those who will rule
on their behalf. This according to Wood (2004) centralises power into the hands of a few,
thereby increasing the likelihood of incongruence between the preferences of citizens and
their representatives as well as the possibility of corruption and abuse of power by the
government. It also means that all citizens do not have equal opportunity to have their voices
heard. Hence Forero-Pineda (2001) argues that participative theory is thus, concerned with
addressing the unequal distribution of power and resources and its effect on the daily lives of
people. Citizen participation is therefore fundamental to democracy and considered central to
governance and for that matter good governance. UNDP (1997) identifies legitimacy and
voice as critical elements of good governance and that participation and consensus orientation
are two strands of the element.

193

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

Participatory theory aims to enhance the egalitarian redistribution of power, resources and
democratisation of the political process at both national and local level. Thus, theorists have
argued for a broader involvement of citizens in political systems and decision making
(Forero-Pineda, 2001). As captured by Berner (2001) citizen participation in the governance
process has become popular and is considered ideal and healthy and that citizen apathy is
hazardous to civic health. Berner, (2001) warned that whether or not the public uses the
opportunity, keeping that option available is important in a democracy. To ensure authentic
democracy therefore, citizen participation will ensure that there is a meaningful tying of
programs to people (Spiegel, 1968).
Planning takes place within intricate and dynamic institutional environments influenced by
socio-economic and environmental factors (Healey 2003).
The global shift from
government to governance and multilevel governance came along with it the concept of
participatory planning meant to deepen democracy and to enhance decision making (Monno
and Khakee 2012). Although PP is said to have been christened variously as ‘collaborative
planning’, ‘communicative planning’, ‘deliberative planning’, ‘consensus building’ among
others, the key essence is the objective to indicate how interactiveness is exuded within the
planning processes (Gedikli 2009). If the end of PP is desirable, it must not be forgotten
that the processes of ensuring PP schemes are quite political. Healey et al.(2008) doubt if PP
has any drastic change effect. They wonder whether it is a strategy by government to reduce
civic protest by getting popular participation and if this is so, what benefits will be served. PP
could also be a scheme to take advantage of citizens to reduce costs in pursuance of elites self
serving policies or it serves to legitimise democracy for the elites. PP have also been
conceptualised as a way of “regularising urban conflicts” (Healey et al. 2008:379). Of course
PP has also been attributed to impacts of the “social and environmental movement” of the
1960s which not only opened a new chapter in urban policy both in material and process
terms but also came along with a corps of actors amenable to citizens voices, learned and
supported their activities (Healey et al. 2008).
Although PP has been considered valuable in principle, there are concerns about its realities
and the willingness of actors to adopt it wholeheartedly. Citizens are often denied real
influence and seldom their concerns taken onboard as their participation is limited to
information and consultation (Monno and Khakee 2012). This situation had been reported to
probably be changing slowly in jurisdictions with pressure from donors, civil society and the
media. Some arguments suggest that since the ability of citizens to push for more space in
constrained, there must be increased pressure for vertical accountability (Devas and Grant
2003) but this is know to stifle initiatives for more citizens’ participation. Agger and Löfgren
(2008) have identified a number of variables in relation to the two elements of process and
outcomes of PP. They argue that assessing PP processes should include an assessment of the
variables of broad social grouping representation; right to express opinions; mutual respect by
all actors; transparency and availability of information; the right to dissent; and capacity to
influence the process. Following from this, they propose a framework for assessing PP. The
“norms” as they call the elements of their framework are access, public deliberation,
adaptiveness, accountability, and political identities. These norms are assessed along the lines
of input-process-outcome stream.
194

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

It is important to recognise that if citizens must have a say in how the finances of the local
government get managed, they must as well be able to influence how the planning is done.
Local government expenditure is based upon plans and therefore, if citizens participate in the
planning of the district, they invariable will have made significant impact on the preparation
of the budget and ultimately, on the expenditure of the district. Multilateral institutions and
national governments as well as local government institution are increasingly interested in
participatory mechanisms as part of a discourse clustered around public management
concepts of good governance and public-private partnerships. From this perspective citizens’
participation is viewed by the World Bank (2005) and Inter-American Development Bank
(1997) as a way of increasing governmental accountability and transparency in public affairs
in combination with budget strictness.
2.2. Participatory Budgeting (Marquetti et al. 2012a)
PB is a public decision making device that allows citizens to discuss and negotiate the
allocation of public resources (Wampler 2007). It is considered a mechanism for
“administrative incorporation, expanding participation and narrowing contestation (He
2011:122). It is defined broadly as “a form of participatory democracy in which citizens and
civil society organizations have the right to participate directly in determining fiscal policy”
(Marquetti et al. 2012b:63). It begun to receive increased attention after it was introduced in
Porto Alegre in Brazil. In that context, it was a scheme to ensure that citizens had significant
say in prioritising the items on the public expenditure list for municipal investments (Cleuren
2008). PB mechanisms are increasing with more demands for good and democratic
governance. In this regard, it is considered to come along with a couple of features that
should enhance space for citizens’ participation but success rates are said to range from
“highly successful to very weak” (Wampler 2007:22).
PB increases the space for discourse on governmental spending and sheds lights on the
budgetary process which defuses the steam for patronage and corruption. It serves as a
training platform for educating citizens in the games of negotiation and the skill of asserting
their rights. The argument is also advanced that budget restrain is achieved when pressure is
brought to bear on policymakers through the participatory processes. It has positive effects
for the redistribution of resources to poor neighbourhoods, improved quality of public
services, and budget transparency. It stimulates and increases the information flow towards
the participants during the budget scheme in order to enable citizens to scrutinise municipal
accounts and procedures (Brinkerhoff and Goldsmith 2003;Wampler 2007;Mullins
2007;Souza 2001a;Kluvers and Pillay 2009).
Although PB is expected to have implications for accountability, the decentralization of
decision-making authority and empowerment, the implications are not automatic as these are
influenced by socio-economic and political factors. Robinson (2003) argues that there exists
very little systematic or comparative evidence worldwide whether increased citizens’
participation generates better outputs in terms of public services. Getting participatory
mechanisms to work requires the inclusion of various social groups (Sintomer et al. 2008),
the management of which presents key challenges. This results from the fact that budgets are
often reactive tools to satisfy political demands (Jermias and Setiawan 2008). Other times the
195

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

capacity of participants to make significant inputs has been doubtful (Boon et al. 2012). In
most cases, final outputs of participatory processes do not reflect the aspiration and views
expressed by participants (Michels 2012).
In spite of these reservations about PB, the practice is still being advocated for and various
participatory schemes have been adopted in budgetary processes (Berner 2001) but whatever
the method adopted, it is important to recognise environmental peculiarities (Souza 2001b).
Among the PB strategies, public hearings are very popular but require that prospective
participants make time to attend. To address this weakness, other less site specific schemes
such as visits to local civic groups, town hall meetings, opportunities to speak at regular
meetings, citizen advisory boards, mail-in coupons, coffeehouse conversations, telephone
surveys, mail surveys, fax surveys, web sites/e-mail, visits to neighbourhood associations,
and contact initiated by citizens have been adopted (Berner 2001;Franklin et al. 2009). It is
however important to note that many of these strategies may not work in a developing
country context. Mail and tele-related methods may not be appropriate in most developing
countries where these services hardly function well. This requires investigation into
identifying methods and strategies that will be most appropriate for involving citizens in
participatory budgeting in these contexts.
3. A conceptual framework: Stakeholder Analysis
There have been debates over who qualifies to participate in participatory governance
programmes such as PB. This results from the nagging question of whether participants are a
problem or solution in the scheme of solving development problems (Brinkerhoff and
Goldsmith 2003). This is especially so when participation is perceived to bring in personal
benefits either in material form or image enhancing (Boon et al. 2012). In ensuring that the
right actors with the right interest are recruited to participate at the right stage and at the right
time, stakeholder analysis is often considered the appropriate tool to adopt. In stakeholder
analysis, several methods have been adopted but subjective models have presented challenges
to good stakeholder analysis (Prell et al. 2009). What remains true is that irrespective of the
type of analysis method, the span of interest in the project under consideration threatens an
effective stakeholder analysis.
Stakeholder analysis in the public sector context should examine two perspectives: the
mandatory and the permissive stakeholders. Mandatory stakeholders are those required by
law to be stakeholders. In many policy and governmental actions, certain individuals and
groups of persons are mandated to constitute core actors. These actors then cannot be
neglected in the stakeholder engagement processes. These stakeholders are said to have
“formal bureaucratic and political authority” and therefore have the legitimacy to make
decisions (Gilson et al. 2012:166). Although many of these mandated stakeholders may not
be personally affected by the policy, the institutions they represent may have significant
interest in the outcomes of the policy. Permissive stakeholders are made of two types of
stakeholders – interest wielders and interest advocates. Interest wielders constitute those
stakeholders whose interests may be affected by a policy and for good governance purposes,
are permitted to participate in the policy processes. Interest advocates on the other hand are
those who purport to fight on behalf of the interest wielders who are incapable of fighting for
196

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

themselves. Included in this later category of permissive stakeholders are civil society
organisations who directly advocate on behalf of stakeholder or empower the stakeholders to
hold duty bearers accountable. This paper adopts the mandatory-permissive framework as a
guide in analysing the stakeholder participation in planning, budgeting and financial
management of the district assemblies. In other words, the paper tries to identify how actors
considered as mandatory to participate in the planning and budgetary process and how they
get involved at the local level. It also tries to identify those actors who are permitted to
participate and how they are involved or not.
4. Methods and data collection Procedure
4.1 Overview of the Sefwi Wiawso District
The Sefwi Wiawso District (SWD) lies in the Western Region between latitude 6º00’ and
6º30’ north and longitude 2º15’and 2º45’ west. The district covers an area of 2,166.22 Km2
comprising of 1,303.12 km2 off reserved and 863.10 km2 on reserved forests.

Source: http://www.ghanapolice.info/map_western_region.htm

The district is the seventh largest in the Western Region of Ghana. Lying in the north-eastern
part of the region. It is bordered to the north by Brong Ahafo Region; to the west, by Juaboso
and Bia Districts, to the east by Bibiani-Bekawi District and by Aowin- Suaman to the south.
The population of Sefwi Wiawso District is estimated at 148,950 comprising (51.3%) males
197

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

and (48.7%) females (Ghana Statistical Service 2000) with an annual growth rate of 2.9%.
The dominance of male population in the district is the result of the influx of males from
other parts of the country for farming, especially cocoa which is labour intensive and
dominated by men and also the timber processing firms in the district recruit more males than
females. The mainstay of the local economy is agriculture which employs 80 percent of the
population.
4.2 Study Approach, Design and Data Collection
The case study design within the qualitative paradigm was used for this study. This is because
it involves an in depth or intensive descriptions and analysis of a single unit or bounded
system. This method was deemed appropriate because the researchers examine in detail,
many features of a few cases at a point in time often in a qualitative form (Neuman, 2007).
The qualitative research instruments used for this study were In-depth Interviews and Focus
Groups Discussions. To facilitate this process, the researchers first identified the various
stakeholders in the Sefwi Wiawso through workshops organised in May and June 2012.
Stakeholder identification and analysis is best conducted using brainstorming techniques.
This procedure is generally best in a workshop setting, with representatives of key
participants. The participants first listed all parties which are likely to be affected by the
development in the district, both positively or negatively, directly or indirectly. The
stakeholders were grouped into five main interest groups. The groups include youth, women’s
groups, farmer-based organisations, civil society organisations, assembly members, opinion
leaders and local authorities. Key informant interviews are qualitative in-depth interviews
with people who have particular knowledge and understanding of the issues regarding the
research topic or area of study. The purpose of the key informant interviews in this study was
to collect information from a wide range of people including district planning officers,
coordinating directors, community and opinion leaders. A total of 15 respondents participated
in the in-depth interviews. They include a district planning officer, budget officer, finance
officer, coordinating director, presiding officer, some assembly members and opinion leaders.
In addition 4 FGDs were organised in four communities with assembly members, women
groups, farmers and opinion leaders. FGD is a technique involving the use of in-depth group
interviews in which participants are purposively selected from a representative sample of a
specific target group. The purpose of focus group discussions is to gain knowledge about a
particular topic or need by interviewing a group of people directly affected by the issue. The
FGD generated information related to their knowledge in decentralisations, their participation
in the planning, budgeting and implementation of development projects, and accountability in
the district. The groups were selected based on similarity of socio-characteristics so that they
would be comfortable talking to the interviewer and each other. To ensure reliability and
validity of the data, it was triangulated with information collected from the key informants.
5. Results and Discussion
This section presents the results and discussion of the data generated through in-depth
interviews and focus group discussions. This covers an overview of the planning and
budgeting process of the district assembly, interest and power of stakeholders, community
involvement in decision making, monitoring and evaluation of community development
198

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

projects as well community involvement in transparency and accountability of the district
assembly.
5.1 Over view of the Planning and Budgeting processes of the District Assembly
Planning is a vital component of the current system of district administration in Ghana.
Planning and budgeting is done at the various levels of the district assembly concept. At the
grassroots level, it starts with community involvement where the community members
assume responsibility to contribute to their own development through assembly members and
sub-district structures. Act 480 of the 1992 constitution offers the legal basis for every
District Assembly to develop a focused plan that outlines strategic programmes to meet the
development needs of the entire district (MLGRD, 2010). Each District Planning
Coordinating Unit (DPCU) is supposed to plan and implement the Assembly’s own plans
within the framework of the national plan.
The planning has two phases. Stage one is the participation level at the local communities.
This is done to identify the communities’ problems and opportunities and also facilitates the
engagement of all parties through public hearings. Stage two involves the synthesization and
priority setting by the District Assembly of all the inputs from the Unit Committees and the
local people before upward submission to the Regional Coordinating Councils and to the
National Development Planning Commission (NDPC) which is the final body that ensures
consistency and continuity in the framing and execution of development policy for the entire
country. These initiatives are harnessed into the District Plan, which is directed into national
strategic planning by the National Development Planning Commission. The DCD and the
DPO indicated that each stage in the process and input capture involves consultations with
the local people.
“We have observed that most of the people are either not interested in the process or not
aware because the assemblymen are supposed to inform the entire community and to solicit
their participation”.

It was clear during the FGDs that most people are not to be aware of this process as reveal by
the results of the FGDs. Before rural communities can make attempts to impact public policy,
it is important that they have an understanding of the policy-making process itself
5.2 Interest and power classification of stakeholders
The stakeholder analysis identified five main stakeholders. The results of the FGDs and
In-depth interviews revealed various levels of stakeholder interests and potential of each
stakeholder to influence the planning and budget process of the district. The level of interest
is the priority and importance the stakeholder attaches to the process of decentralisation and
community development. The level of influence also depends on the quantity and type of
resources and power the stakeholder can marshal to promote its position on participation. The
results indicate that interests in the decentralisation processes of the district are very diverse.
Table 1 indicates the various stakeholders, their level of interests and influence in the
199

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

decentralisation process.
Table 1: Stakeholder Interest and Power to influence decentralisation process

Stakeholder

Interests

Power/level
of influence

Youth

High

Low

Farmers

Low

Low

Women

High

Low

Civil Society organisations

High

High

Assemblymen

High

low???

Opinion Leaders

High

Low

Local authorities

High

High

Source: FGD, 2012
The study reveals that the interest of youth in the development process of the district is high
but with low power to influence the process. The assembly members who represent the
community have also high interest in the community development but seems powerless with
low level of influence. The most vulnerable identified groups are the women and farmers.
The study reveals that there has been very little inclination towards the involvement of the
rural women and farmers in the development process of the district. Although women have
high interest in the development process of the district but with low power to influence
decision making due to socio-cultural factors revealed during the FGD 3.
“Most of the issues affect us and our children so we are more interested in the development of
the district. …..we fetch the water, grow the food crops, take care of the children but when
they discuss things that affect us nobody consults us”.
“Whatever the men agreed upon is okay for us. In this community when you are a woman and
you question some issues you are branded as a witch”. I for instance, had wanted to contest
the district assembly elections three years ago to represent my electoral area at the district
assembly but my husband objected to it and I stopped”.
“Most of us cannot read nor write and therefore we don’t understand how the work of the
district assembly is done. Some of us even don’t know the name of the District Chief
Executive. They only inform us that a new DCE has been chosen.
200

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

Youth engagement and participation is very crucial in local community development. They
provide new ideas and voices that will stimulate enthusiasm and promote effective
participation in local government process and structures. The interest of the youth in the
development of the district is high but have low influence in decision making. However, the
youth feel under represented with low voice and mistrust. A youth leader lamented:
“Master, the assemblymen hardly meet with us to brief us on the developments in the district.
For instance a timber contractor was here to log in this community. The contractor got his
permit to log in the forest here without our knowledge and when we asked he directed us to
go the assembly and when we went to the Assembly nobody was willing to listen to us so we
came back to block the contractor from logging and it became a big issue and I was put in
police cells for three days…..since then most of the youth feel reluctant to talk about
community development”.
“Most of the chiefs and DCEs think we the youth are threat to their administration and
therefore they do everything to block our participation. ……the past DCE for instance never
visited this community because he said the youth of this community do not respect”.

The above is an indication of the challenges that youth face in participation. However, within
the greater social framework of community participation in development process, youth may
have expertise or interests in specific issues. As youth are brought into and connected with
organizations and civic roles that they have traditionally been excluded from, they can
participate in active and equal decision making at multiple levels.
Another important stakeholder whose interest in the development of the district is very high
are the Assemblymen. It was clear from the FGDs that they have the power to influence the
process. The only challenge is that most of the members lack the advocacy and lobbying
skills. Most are illiterates and cannot properly review development documents.
The DPO stated that:
“Although the assemblymen have high interest in the development projects that affect their
communities’, the problem is that most of them are not able to influence the process because
most of them when they come to assembly meetings they cannot air their views. Some of them
do not bring any input from their constituents”

Another important obstacle to the full participation of the assemblymen is lack of information.
Underpinning greater public participation and accountability is the right of the public to
information. Without the public's access to information, the level to which citizens can be an
integral part of the governance system is stalled. Public access to information can be equated
with transparency and this is a great antidote for many types of corruption and malpractice in
201

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

public administration. The FGDs among the assemblymen reveal that most of them feel that
access to information about the district’s programmes and projects is difficult.

As an assemblyman I can tell you that the award of contract for some of the development
projects in the district is not transparent. There are a number of development projects in the
district that I don’t know how they were awarded to contractors”. When you demand for the
cost of project they will not tell you. If I find it difficult to understand some of the process how
can a community member understand it.

If you are an assemblyman and not in the ruling party you do not have access to lot of
information. They won’t even tell you. This affects our ability to effectively monitor
development projects in the district….a lot of people have become to contractors overnight
because they are party loyalists and therefore they should be compensated. That is why most
of our projects are poorly executed.

The planning process they talk about.. master even if you bring some views from your
electoral area they decide to take or leave it. Most of our ideas are not factored into the
planning. …..also some of the community members when you invite them for community
meeting they refuse and tell you the assembly has nothing to offer them. I am even confuse of
the process myself. What I can say is that we are not well informed ourselves as
assemblymen.

As Oduro (2010) notes, an informed citizenry is capacitated to better advocate for
accountability of public officials on their conduct and on decisions made on matters affecting
the public such as infrastructural development and service delivery. The study reveals that
generally the level of participation and influence among the stakeholders in the district is low
because most of the people, particularly the farmers, youth, women and opinion leaders lack
proper understanding of the planning and budgeting systems of the district assemblies which
are necessary for the promotion of an effective, responsive and responsible government at the
local level. In addition they lack effective advocacy and lobbying skills and therefore they are
unable to effectively participate in the process.
5.3 Community Involvement in Planning and Budgeting in the District
Although, the concept has the potential to promote local democracy, enhance public policy
making, improve service delivery, and poverty reduction, it has not adequately addressed
equal and reciprocal partnership between the district assemblies and the local population.
Discussions with the DCD and DPO reveal that although the planning processes of the
district assembly involve the local population in decision making at various level, the
challenge is that the participation of the local population through the town hall meetings and
Unit Committees has not been effective. DPO intimated that:

202

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

“In all these stages we expect the community members to be actively involved to ensure that
their views and needs are captured in the district planning”.
“There is also a problem of who represents the community in engagement processes. How
does assembly balance the authority of the traditional leaders, assembly members and
community members with the one that comes from broad community participation?. These
are issues we need to understand”

The DCD confirms this in the following statements
“Although the district has made some level of progress in engaging the citizens to participate
in the planning and budgeting process, the district seems to be lacking in the area of
participatory planning, which is one of the key components of decentralization”. “Our
challenge is that most assembly members do not consult their constituents. Most Unit
Committees in the district are not functioning… they are only on paper”.

The results of FGDs also indicate that there has been very little inclination towards the
involvement of the local people during the planning and budgeting processes of the of the
district assembly. The participation of local people is very minimal and in some cases
community members were not even aware of the process at all. Most of them have never
heard about any community hearing aiming at soliciting their inputs for development projects
that concern them.
“We are not aware of this process. Maybe it is on paper but in practice they never organised
this kind of meeting in my community”.
“They said we are the most important primary stakeholders in the decentralization process
but our assemblymen do not disseminate the outcomes of assembly meetings in the
communities and vice versa”.

Although members of the District Assembly and the Sub-District Councils are required to
collate and analyze in detail all the major problems of their communities to facilitate the
formulation of programmes, projects and activities, and also mobilize community members,
and facilitate the needs assessment in the communities during community dialogue meetings
for onward submission to the District Assemblies most members are not doing this.
Discussion with some assemblymen during the FGD shows that there are a number of
logistical and capacity challenges confronting the assemblymen which make it difficult for
them to function effectively. Some participants of FGD (5) said.
“I am an assemblyman overseeing about 15 communities scattered all over the place. I don’t
203

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

even have motor bike to go round to meet them. Recently the government provided us motor
bikes to help our work and even that to fuel the motor bike, master is a problem. The
assembly work is voluntary work. You see the problem?”.
“Most of our fellow assemblymen are illiterates. They can’t contribute in the assembly though
some have genuine problems”…during assembly meetings they do not talk but after the
meeting then you will realise that they have issues but could not raise them”

The FDG (4-SCO) agrees:
“It is important that the communities are educated to elect Assemblymen who are educated
and knowledgeable in the district assembly concept to be able to represent their views”.
“For assemblymen to play an active role in the decentralisation process, it is necessary that
they have access to resources and their capacity need to be built”.
Inadequate resources and capacity can negatively impact a rural community’s ability to
effectively influence policy development compared to other players in the policymaking
process. Serious consideration must be given to the full implementation of the sub-district
structures to facilitate information dissemination, community engagement and participation
of the local communities to ensure that community development reflects the needs of the
people as opined by some during the FGD (2).
“We know what we need as community but sometimes the assembly will not consult us on
things that concern us. Did you see the KVIP in this town?... they brought it unannounced,
the people patronised it when it was new but now nobody uses it again because they prefer
the traditional type we use to dig and maintain ourselves”.
“The assembly gave us this borehole. Initially they never mentioned about user fees. After the
construction they told us to pay when we fetch water. Now some people in the community
have refused to use it. They still prefer to fetch from the stream instead of paying for this
water”.
“For me as farmer, who cares about my views? But we also have something that can be good
for development of this district”.

204

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

“We have unit committee members who are to discuss the development needs on behalf of the
community and also carry our inputs to the assembly but the problem is that most of them do
not themselves understand the process”.
“I would say that we as a community do not have a say in the assembly because although we
elected an assemblyman but he is a teacher and resides in Kumasi. He only come to this
community when the assembly is meeting and after that he goes back to Kumasi”.

The relationship between the local communities and the district assembly is strained by the
community perception that the assembly do not understand rural issues and impose their
development programmes that negatively affect them. From the perspective of the
community members, the attitudes and action of the local authorities have created barriers to
working together to improve the lives of the people. The community members often perceive
the district’s priorities and interventions as not things that they need.
5.4 Transparency and Accountability in district Assembly
Transparency and accountability are critical for the efficient functioning of the district
assemblies and for fostering social well-being. The district assemblies are accepted by
ordinary people as the institution to look up to for most of their basic needs. It is therefore
important that the assemblies ensure transparency and accountability and good governance.
An opinion leader decried the pervasive corruption in the district assembly in the following
words:
“There is too much corruption my brother…too much stealing…they connive with the
contractors. Too much waste in the system, lack of cash control, poor procurement and
purchasing practices, award of project contracts. These things can be minimized if proper
measures were put in place but by who”.

IDI (4-SCO) suggests:
“Community members should be empowered to have access to information, budget
monitoring, and expenditure monitoring, and tracking of development projects. This would
make the assembly accountable. We as an NGO should also participate actively in monitoring
spending by the district assemblies, especially in the execution of contracts”.

The process of enhancing access to information and public accountability for enhancing
citizens' participation is going to be complex. However, they remain important elements in
the promotion of transparency and accountability. There is the need for civil society
organisations and community members to help promote transparency and accountability by
205

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

focusing attention on corrupt practices at all levels of governance, including the community
leaders and not to concentrate solely on the assembly officials.

Some of the chiefs and assembly members are corrupt. We need to check them not only the
district assembly. ……also the assembly’s process of engagement could be very effective if the
assembly members have the capacity and lobbying skills”.
“The assembly is supposed to be a place for information but whenever you request for any
information from the assembly regarding accountability or about the implementation project
in your community they see you as litigant and nobody listens to you”.

The knowledge about the current and future needs of the people in a district is very vital in
development planning processes. It can inform decision-makers about the critical decisions
regarding the kind of interventions required by the district assembly to speed up development
project and to reduce poverty. Most of the representatives of the communities do not
understand the process of planning, budgeting and financial management and decision
making processes in the district. To achieve effective inclusiveness, there must be greater
responsiveness on the part of elected and appointed assembly members.
5.5 Structures for community engagement in Monitoring of development projects
The community engagement process means working with and through constituents to achieve
common goals. The study reveals that at the district assembly level the clear procedures and
structures for community engagement in the monitoring and evaluation of development
interventions seldom exist though some structures for promoting community engagement
during planning processes. There are no clear structures for community involvement in the
monitoring of development interventions in the district. The FGD discussions reveal issues
such as poor relationships with the community members, mistrust and perceived lack of
capacity on the part of the rural population in the monitoring and evaluation of development
projects.
FGD (3) lamented:
“What I can say is that the assembly has not been able to establish good relationships and
trust with the leadership in the communities so as to create effective processes for mobilizing
the community”. Master, if the process is not transparent how you can trust the system?. They
think we do not know anything….we can monitor the contractors to make sure they build
schools, clinics or any other project very well. Some officials of the assembly connive with the
contractors to steal project funds. They think we don’t know.

However, the DCD disagrees:
“good relationship with communities is the best option but you see most often it also creates
206

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

tension between communities and district assembly because of mistrust. Most of the
assemblymen are not able to brief community members about projects in their
communities….some them even accuse the assembly of conniving with contractors to inflate
project costs but this is not true”. This is because they don’t understand the bidding process
and other issues therefore give different interpretations to the implementation of projects”.

While the local assembly interventions certainly affects communities and vice versa, there is
a limit to the engagement and influence local assembly can have with communities. The
process demands that those implementing the engagement processes communicate with
community leaders and members who have diverse backgrounds, values, priorities, and
concerns. Structures and processes that mediate communication between government and
communities are crucial to engagement (OECD, 2001).
6. Policy Recommendations
This section recommends some policy strategies and actions that would better support citizen
participation in the district assembly planning and budgeting in Ghana.
6.1 Review of the budgetary process
To enhance PB, the budgetary cycle must change to allow for the time spent on consultations.
It is important to realise that actors need to know the budgetary cycle and be prompted to
make submissions at the right time to enable the development of proposals for consultation.
This should be taken into consideration the geography of the country. In this regard, it is
important to give adequate time for districts with difficult to reach terrains to be able effective
engage their constituents before plans and budgets are prepared. The ministry of finance
should also require evidence of public consultation before budgets are approved for funding.
6.2 Capacity issues of stakeholders
Participation is a two-way affair. When space is given for participation, it is important for the
participants to have the capacity to engage the duty bearers. Since the capacity of both
assembly members and citizens is low, it is important for the assemblies to invest in
developing their capacity. Assemblies stand to benefit with empowered and capacitated
citizens as this would not only make their work easy, it will also create awareness on the
work of the assemblies and contribute to enhancing their revenue drive.
6.3 Open Government through local Radio
Ghana now has a very vibrant media landscape especially local radio stations. This can be
exploited by the Assemblies and civil society organisations to organise open government
programmes to discuss the assembly planning systems and budgets and seek the inputs of
listeners and contributors through phone-ins. These programmes will have better reach if they
are held in the local languages. Another form of open government that will serve especially
the rural communities would be cinema van shows for communities and market days. District
assemblies can document their programmes on video and show these in cinema vans. The
National Council for Civic Educations and the Information Services Department could play
key roles in achieving these.
207

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

6.4 Election of DCEs
Arguments have been made elsewhere that the election of the DCE would help to improve
the workings of the assemblies. We would like to add our voice to this call and advocate for
this to be done. The wisdom is this move is that the campaigns for election by contestants
would bring out issues that ordinary citizens would normally not be told. It would also ensure
that the DCE aspirants present themselves for scrutiny by the small critical mass of the
citizens who care about the local government system.
6.5 Involvement of Chiefs in Planning and Budgetary reviews
For a long time, the chiefs have been kept on the fringes of local government system with
very minimal involvement. At this point, it is recommended that chiefs should made part of
the planning reviews and budget hearings. This way, the chief could hold the local
governments accountable and report to their subjects the outcomes of such hearings. Chiefs
still command some respect and could use their traditional cultural functions such as festival
times to hold durbars where the local government could address the citizens.
6.6 Civil Society Advocacy and Involvement
Civil society and NGOs have a significant role to play in keeping the assemblies and their
officials in check through advocacy campaigns and capacity building programmes to help
enhance the capacity of key stakeholders. Advocacy and lobbying may have significant
influence on the behaviours of the assembly officials.
6.7 Accounts Audit Hearings
Another avenue for more public engagement and accountability could be through accounts
audit hearings in the nature of what the public accounts committee of Parliament does. Open
audit hearings would provide citizens opportunities to get informed about how their monies
have been used. These could be organised for the various traditional areas to ensure that as
many people as possible get to participate in them.
7. Conclusion
Whereas the arguments in the literature and from the rhetoric of politicians are concerned, has
underscored the need for local government structures and the capacity of the people to be
strengthened at the district level to make the local government system more practical and
meaningful in improving the welfare of the people. This lack of space for stakeholder
participation has constrained the promotion of effective, responsive and responsible
government at the local level for poverty reduction. Procedures and structures for community
engagement in the monitoring and evaluation of development interventions seldom exist. The
paper concludes that an effective engagement of local communities and other stakeholders
will enhance transparency and improve upon service delivery within the local government
systems. There is the need for progressing of engagement beyond consultation by developing
a more effective engagement processes in the district. There should therefore be conscious
effort to build capacities of local people particularly the key stakeholders to create space for
local engagement so as to enhance the efforts of decentralisation and fast track poverty
reduction in the district and Ghana as a whole. There is the need to also facilitate and equip
208

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

assembly members with understanding of the planning and budgeting systems of the district
assemblies and to improve their lobbying and the advocacy skills.
References
Agger, A. & Löfgren, K. (2008). Democratic Assessment of Collaborative Planning Processes.
Planning Theory, 7(2), 145-164.
Ahwoi, K. (2010). Local Government and Decentralisation in Ghana. Accra: Unimax
Macmillan Ltd.
Ayee, J. R. A. (2008). The Balance Sheet of Decentralization in Ghana
Foundations for Local Governance. In: Saito, F. (ed.). Physica-Verlag HD.
Berner, M. (2001). Citizen Participation in Local Government Budgeting. Popular
Government, Spring(2001), 23-30.
Boon, E., Bawole, J. N. & Ahenkan, A. (2012). Stakeholder participation in community
development projects: an analysis of the quadripartite model of the International Centre for
Enterprise and Sustainable Development (ICED) in Ghana. Community Development, 1-17.
Brinkerhoff, D. W. & Goldsmith, A. A. (2003). How Citizens Participate in Macroeconomic
Policy: International Experience and Implications for Poverty Reduction. World Development,
31(4), 685-701.
Cleuren, H. (2008). Administrating Participatory Budgeting in Porto Alegre. Street-level
Officials and Organisational Preconditions. Revista Chilena de Administración Pública, 12
(Diciembre 2008), 19-41.
Crawford, G. (2009). ‘Making democracy a reality’? The politics of decentralisation and the
limits to local democracy in Ghana. Journal of Contemporary African Studies, 27(1), 57-83.
Devas, N. & Grant, U. (2003). Local government decision-making—citizen participation and
local accountability: some evidence from Kenya and Uganda. Public Administration and
Development, 23(4), 307-316.
Franklin, A. L., Ho, A. T. & Ebdon, C. (2009). Participatory Budgeting in Midwestern States:
Democratic Connection or Citizen Disconnection? Public Budgeting & Finance, 29(3),
52-73.
Gedikli, B. (2009). The Role of Leadership in the Success of Participatory Planning
Processes. European Urban and Regional Studies, 16(2), 115-130.
Gilson, L., Erasmus, E., Borghi, J., Macha, J., Kamuzora, P. & Mtei, G. (2012). Using
stakeholder analysis to support moves towards universal coverage: lessons from the SHIELD
project. Health Policy and Planning, 27(suppl 1), i64-i76.
He, B. (2011). Civic engagement through participatory budgeting in China: Three different
logics at work. Public Administration and Development, 31(2), 122-133.
Healey, P. (2003). Collaborative Planning in Perspective. Planning Theory, 2(2), 101-123.
Healey, P., Booher, D. E., Torfing, J., Sørensen, E., Ng, M. K., Peterson, P. & Albrechts, L.
209

www.macrothink.org/jpag

Journal of Public Administration and Governance
ISSN 2161-7104
2013, Vol. 3, No. 2

(2008). Civic Engagement, Spatial Planning and Democracy as a Way of Life Civic
Engagement and the Quality of Urban Places Enhancing Effective and Democratic
Governance through Empowered Participation: Some Critical Reflections One Humble
Journey towards Planning for a More Sustainable Hong Kong: A Need to Institutionalise
Civic Engagement Civic Engagement and Urban Reform in Brazil Setting the Scene.
Planning Theory & Practice, 9(3), 379-414.
Jermias, J. & Setiawan, T. (2008). The moderating effects of hierarchy and control systems
on the relationship between budgetary participation and performance. The International
Journal of Accounting, 43(3), 268-292.
Kluvers, R. & Pillay, S. (2009). Participation in the Budgetary Process in Local Government.
Australian Journal of Public Administration, 68(2), 220-230.
Marquetti, A., Schonerwald da Silva, C. E. & Campbell, A. (2012a). Participatory Economic
Democracy in Action. Review of Radical Political Economics, 44(1), 62-81.
Marquetti, A., Schonerwald da Silva, C. E. & Campbell, A. (2012b). Participatory Economic
Democracy in Action. Review of Radical Political Economics, 44(1), 62-81.
Michels, A. (2012). Citizen Participation in Local Policy Making: Design and Democracy.
International Journal of Public Administration, 35(4), 285-292.
Monno, V. & Khakee, A. (2012). Tokenism or Political Activism? Some Reflections on
Participatory Planning. International Planning Studies, 17(1), 85-101.
Mullins, R. D. (2007). Local Budget Process. In: Anwar, S. (ed.) Local Budgeting
Washington DC: The World Bank.
Prell, C., Hubacek, K. & Reed, M. (2009). Stakeholder Analysis and Social Network Analysis
in Natural Resource Management. Society & Natural Resources, 22(6), 501-518.
Sintomer, Y., Herzberg, C. & RÖCke, A. (2008). Participatory Budgeting in Europe:
Potentials and Challenges. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 32(1),
164-178.
Souza, C. (2001a). Participatory budgeting in Brazilian cities: limits and possibilities in
building democratic institutions. Environment and Urbanization, 13(1), 159-184.
Souza, C. (2001b). Participatory budgeting in Brazilian cities: limits and possibilities in
building democratic institutions. Environment and Urbanization, 13(1), 159-184.
UNDP. (1997). Governance for sustainable human development: a UNDP policy document
[Online]. New York: UNDP. [Accessed 19/3/ 2012].
Wampler, B. (2007). A Guide to Participatory Budgeting. In: SHAH, A. (ed.) Participatory
Budgeting. Washinton DC: World Bank.

210

www.macrothink.org/jpag

