Community Development

ISSN: 1557-5330 (Print) 1944-7485 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rcod20

Stakeholder participation in community
development projects: an analysis of the
quadripartite model of the International Centre
for Enterprise and Sustainable Development
(ICED) in Ghana

Emmanuel Boon, Justice Nyigmah Bawole & Albert Ahenkan

To cite this article: Emmanuel Boon, Justice Nyigmah Bawole & Albert Ahenkan (2013)
Stakeholder participation in community development projects: an analysis of the quadripartite
model of the International Centre for Enterprise and Sustainable Development (ICED) in
Ghana, Community Development, 44:1, 38-54, DOI: 10.1080/15575330.2011.651729

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15575330.2011.651729

Published online: 01 Feb 2012.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 2945

View related articles 

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rcod20



Community Development, 2013
Vol. 44, No. 1, 38–54, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15575330.2011.651729

Stakeholder participation in community development projects:
an analysis of the quadripartite model of the International Centre for
Enterprise and Sustainable Development (ICED) in Ghana

Emmanuel Boona, Justice Nyigmah Bawoleb* and Albert Ahenkana

aHuman Ecology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussels, Laarbeeklaan 103, B1090 Jette
Brussels, Belgium; bInstitute for Development Policy and Management, The University of
Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK

The increasing importance of stakeholders in project design, implementation, and
evaluation requires mechanisms to ensure their effective participation to enhance
project success. As a national non-governmental organisation (NGO) engaged in
the design and implementation of community development projects, International
Centre for Enterprise and Sustainable Development (ICED) adopts a quad-
ripartite project participation model (QPPM) that facilitates the participation of
project stakeholders. This article analyzes the model and its implication for
managing community development projects in Ghana. The article adopts an
action research strategy relying on the experiential knowledge of the authors in
the application of the model. The results of the analysis indicate that although
stakeholder participation in community development projects can be very
challenging, the application of the model reduces the tensions that often
characterize stakeholder participation. The model helps to spread project
responsibilities, obligations, and rights equitably amongst project stakeholders.

Keywords: community development; Ghana; ICED; project management teams;
stakeholder participation; quadripartite model

Introduction

There is a high degree of consensus among development actors and project managers
on the need for active participation of stakeholders in project design and imple-
mentation in order to ensure high project implementation success. Participation is
inextricably linked to sustainable development and without a plurality of actors and
approaches it cannot be realized (Green & Chambers, 2006). Stakeholder parti-
cipation in project management has been identified as one of the cardinal principles
of good project management and good governance in recent times (Bingham,
Nabatchi, & O’Leary, 2005; Osti, 2004; Woods, 2000). Participation is touted to be
one of the best ways of attracting and sustaining the interest of stakeholders. How-
ever, many writers have indicated the role of stakeholder participation in enhancing
project design and implementation, many often mention the problems in passing

*Corresponding author. Email: justice.bawole@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk
International Centre for Enterprise and Sustainable Development (ICED) is the pseudo name
for the case study organization.

 2013 Community Development Society



Community Development 39

(Ruud, 2007). As development actors continue to rely on stakeholders to enhance
project success, it is important to signpost, from a practical point of view, not only
benefits but also the challenges in stakeholder participation in community
development project design and implementation.

This article presents an analysis of stakeholder participation in community
development projects using ICED’s quadripartite model as a case study. The article
presents the project management model adopted by ICED to engage its stakeholders
in the design and implementation of community development projects in Ghana.
Specifically, the article seeks to analyze the key elements of the model and highlights
its strengths and weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. While the article is limited
due to its reliance on a single organization, its strengths lie in the practical nature of
the model and its ability to engage various levels of stakeholders and the oppor-
tunities offered for each stakeholder to interface with others freely. It also provides
an insight on how both insider and outsider (Krashinsky, 1997) stakeholders can
collaborate for project success.

To accomplish the objective, this article has been structured as follows: Section
‘Stakeholder participation’ introduces the issues and concepts, section ‘Conceptual
framework’ presents the conceptual framework, and section ‘Approach’ outlines the
approach. Section ‘The case organization’ presents a short description of the ICED
organization, section ICED’s quadripartite project participation model’ gives an
exposé of the case study quadripartite model, and section ‘A SWOT analysis of
stakeholder participation in fun projects’ presents the SWOT of stakeholder
participation in the ICED’s projects. Section ‘Implications of the model for project
management’ analyzes the implication of the model for project management, section
‘Challenges of the model’ examines the challenges presented by the model and the
last section provides recommendations and a conclusion.

Stakeholder participation

Development projects are designed and implemented by and for people. These actors
hold various interests in various aspects of the project. These actors otherwise known
as the project stakeholders can either contribute to the success or failure of one or all
components of the project. A stakeholder then is one (or group) who has a certain
interest in a project (Fleming, 2009; Glicken, 2000; Overseas Development Adminis-
tration [ODA], 1995). In general terms, people who constitute stakeholders include
those who can get affected or can affect the development, design, and implementa-
tion of a project or activity (Smith, 2003). The concept of stakeholder participation
has been variously conceived to include a process by which interested parties affect
and take part in the control of development initiatives and the decisions and
resources that influence them (World Bank, 1996). By proactively and systematically
working towards improving the levels of participation in the various stages of a
project, the outcomes are more likely to suit local circumstances, ensure community
ownership, and increase the sustainability of a project, enhance societal harmony,
and increase social learning. It keeps communities better informed, increases trust,
understanding, and support for a project (Enserink & Koppenjan, 2007; Munt, 2002;
Brody, 2003).

Participation in project management could involve the identification of problems,
the design and application of solutions, the monitoring of results, or the evaluation of
performance (Agenda 21, Chapter 23). Indeed, knowing who is to be involved, and



40 E. Boon et al.

what that involvement may be, can form a strong basis for identifying and includ-
ing all the stakeholders. Ngowi and Mselle (1998) have argued that community
participation may be thought of as an instrument of empowerment, building bene-
ficiary capacity in relation to a project, effectiveness in project design and imple-
mentation, and leads to a better match of project services with beneficiary needs and
constraints, enables costs sharing, and improved project efficiency. Stakeholders can
participate in project management in various forms, including what Smith (2003) calls
the traditional forms of participation. He identifies publications, public meeting, open
house, advisory committee/task force, workshops, target briefings, focus groups,
bilateral meetings, toll-free phone line, interviews, surveys, and public hearings as the
key forms of stakeholder participation.

Although participation may seek in the final analysis to empower community
members to take initiative, whether this really happens in practice has been
challenged. Zimmerman (1990) in his model of Learned Hopefulness argues that
although participation directly reduces alienation, it also directly affects empower-
ment, which, in turn, reduces alienation. This assertion is refuted by Reid’s (2002)
argument that of all the empowerment principles, active citizen participation is
perhaps the most important. He asserts that not only does it lead to developing true
democratic processes; it also leads to higher rates of resource acquisition and use,
better results, higher levels of volunteerism, and a brighter community spirit. For
Reid (2002), participation is the soul of an empowered community. He argues
further that development should not make the people marginalized and at the mercy
of external agents.

Participation is a basic human right, and could increase confidence, enhance self-
esteem, and the skills learned through participation enabled the participants to act
more effectively within the wider society. Development should mean the develop-
ment of local people and their organizations and networks as well as the
development of better physical and economic conditions. However, it is difficult to
decide who among the different groups of the population can participate (Chanan,
1999). Under such circumstances, stakeholder analysis is used to identify who
participates and to what extent, who does not and why (Yang, Shen, Bourne, Ho, &
Xue, 2011).

A caveat on stakeholder participation in project management

Although stakeholder participation has been touted to enhance project implementa-
tion, it must be noted that it comes with its own problems. Ruud (2007) states that
although most authors recognize the limits or pitfalls for participation, they tend to
step over them just as quickly as they mention them. Stakeholder participation in
project evaluation is not problem-free and some of the problem areas include
differing philosophical concepts and theoretical approaches; differing understandings
of the purpose of evaluation and accompanying expectations, cultural differences,
competing organizational goals, political agendas, and the history of the project and
entry point of evaluators (Berger-Bartlett & Craig, 2002). Munt (2002) concedes that
developing and maintaining the participation of stakeholders can often be a
challenge requiring various strategies and considerations.

Stakeholder participation may also be very expensive, particularly the cost of
delays in preparation and implementation arising from the need to consult and
negotiate with the other stakeholders. In terms of administrative and advisory



Community Development 41

resources, it may be cost ineffective and it may also have human and financial
implications. It is, therefore, important to note that after the initial stakeholder
analysis and preliminary consultations, a selective approach is necessary as all
projects may not be equally participatory (ODA, 1995). Clearly, participation
involves getting entangled in the web of actors and their idiosyncrasies. According to
the World Bank (1996), though it argues that all stakeholders must work colla-
boratively to advance development projects, it recognizes that different stakeholders
have different levels of power, interests, and resources. It, therefore, warns that
consensus building and reconciling key stakeholder differences is not always easy; it
may entail risks, such as generating or aggravating conflicts among groups with
competing interests and priorities. The argument then is that stakeholder participa-
tion does not necessarily improve project implementation success (Brody, 2003).

In spite of the above, stakeholder participation in community development
projects remains key to project success. In Ghana, a number of community projects
initiated by government (both central and local) have either been opposed by com-
munity members or have never been used after completion. Toilet facilities, market
structures, and boreholes, among others, have been abandoned due to little or no
stakeholder participation. The above caveat is therefore worthy of note but it is
important to indicate that stakeholder participation does not mean other key
elements of project success such as competent project management, planning, and
scheduling should be ignored.

Box 1 typifies the challenges of non-involvement and involvement. If a project
organizer has not decided whether to involve or not means that the organizer will
not anticipate any of these challenges and prepare to handle them. This lack of
preparedness could be suicidal for project management.

Box 1. Stakeholder participation quagmire.

Yao is a youth leader in a village in Ghana. He has won a district’s agricultural awards and
considers himself an important opinion leader in the community. He has been involved in
planning a couple of national farmers’ day celebrations at the district level. His organizational
abilities cannot be doubted. Yao was not included in the LPMT of a community project
because he was not selected by the various constituents. This infuriated him and he started
inciting community members against ICED and her projects. He alleged that ICED keeps a
larger share of the project funds for itself and refuses to let the community get the full picture
of the funding situation of the projects. He argues that money for the project should have been
kept in the community’s accounts in a local bank and members of the community made
signatories to the account. LPMT members and the chiefs have expressed anger at him but
this did not stop him. The LPMT decided to make Yao a LPMT member so as to prevent him
from spreading false information about the implementation of project. He immediately sought
to be allowed to handle monies assigned for communal work. When he was refused, he started
telling the youth to adopt a ‘‘go slow’’ attitude towards communal work as a protest to demand
more funds from the project leaders. This created some challenges with the community’s
commitment. NPMT members had to make several visits and spend lots of time managing the
commitment of the community.

Stakeholder analysis and project management

As a result of the key roles of stakeholders in project management, and their diverse
interests and respective powers to influence project success, stakeholder analysis is
considered a credible way to manage the involvement of various stakeholders in a



42 E. Boon et al.

project (Clulow, 2005). Stakeholder analysis involves identification and evaluation
of interested parties of a project, their key attributes and their relationships with
other stakeholders and project organizers (Bunn, Savage, & Holloway, 2002; Pan
African Health Organization [PAHO], 2008). Who and how they should be involved
has always been a difficult puzzle to work out (Byrd, 2007). The key essence of
stakeholder analysis is to ensure that stakeholders are allowed to participate in a
project depending on their interest, power, and potential contribution to the success
of the project.

The selection of stakeholders at any particular stage of any particular project can
be challenging (Prell, Hubacek, & Reed, 2009) and should be a balancing act that
must be done with skill. To do this well requires the consideration of several factors
including proximity to project sites, economic gain, or loss depending on the
relationship to the new project, use of project or limit to use of project resources,
social implications of the project, and impact of the project on the values of a group
of people. It could also include geographic location, sector, impact, or interest
(Hansen & Mäenpää, 2008; Smith, 2003).

In community development project management, a lot of complexities emerge
during stakeholder analysis which must be managed well. These include cultural and
ethnic complexes, group dynamics and influences, and knowledge of the local
community which can all work against the success of a project (Munt, 2002).
However, managing these complexities should be within the framework that project
participants must feel a sense of personal competence and must be capable to
participate in useful way. It is, therefore, important for the analysis to provide
indications of who get involved, when and how (Yang et al., 2011).

Conceptual framework

Different frameworks have been adopted for analyzing participation. These are so
diverse but Green and Hunton-Clarke (2003) intimate that Arnstein’s (1969)
framework is perhaps the first to try to classify stakeholder participation. The type of
framework to adopt will depend on several factors, the most critical among them
being the milieu or context of the project under consideration. Although different
frameworks for participation have been proposed, this study adopts Vernooy’s
(2005) framework in analyzing ICED’s quadripartite model. This framework is built
upon Biggs’ (1989) four stage participation framework. The choice of the framework
is considered appropriate as it provides a multi-layered approach to participation
and a multi-layered ownership of initiatives in participation which coincides with
ICED’s model. The essential elements of the framework are synthesized in Table 1.

Approach

This article adopts qualitative action research as its preferred method, evoking
many of its elements and strategies when appropriate. Action research stresses on
participative research, knowledge-in-action, practical orientedness, evolving nature
of knowing, and human development as its key tenets (Reason & Bradbury, 2006). It
depicts knowledge creation as a social construction that takes place through the
interaction between researcher and subjects (Crotty, 1998; Reason & Bradbury,
2006). The article relies heavily on the experiential knowledge approach tapping into
the experiences of the two former project managers and the chair of a national NGO



Community Development 43

Table 1. Vernooy’s framework of participation and its implications for ICED’s quadripartite
model.

Type of Implications for ICED’s
participation Key features quadripartite model

Contractual . One stakeholder has sole decision- . FUN adopts this mostly in the
making power over most decisions project conceptualization and

. Stakeholder deemed ‘‘owner’’ of planning stage when the project
the project idea is largely generated by ICED’s

. Stakeholder defines roles for others community diagnostic team

. Others formally or informally . Opinion leaders provide
‘‘contracted’’ to provide services information. Later, LPMTs
and support. provide information and support

guided by the NPMT
. IPMT informed to seek funders
for project idea.

Consultative . Most key decisions made by one . ICED consults extensively
stakeholder with the LPMTs in the selection

. Stakeholder consults and gathers of beneficiaries
information from others . Inputs made by LPMTs

. Other stakeholders help identify . The selection of suppliers of
constraints and opportunities, some project equipment
priority setting and/or evaluation. . Type and quantity of equipment

done by LPMTs and NPMTs.
Collaborative . Different stakeholders collaborate . ICED adopts this in dealing with

. Stakeholders deemed equally partner organizations, e.g. local
important government, community water,

. Stakeholder linkage through and sanitation agency, Business
knowledge sharing Advisory Center, and District

. Sharing of decision-making power Directorates of Agriculture
during the innovation process. . Representatives of partner

organisations are active members
of the LPMTs and directly
participate in decision making.

Collegiate . Stakeholders work together as . ICED adopts donors and partner
colleagues or partners organisations abroad

. Ownership and responsibility are . LPMTs, NPMT, and IPMT
equally distributed distribute the project

. Decisions made by consensus. implementation responsibilities
. Adopted when communities
initiate a project and ask for the
intervention of ICED or vice versa.

in Ghana. The article analyzes the project management approach adopted over a
period of a decade and distils the elements into a quadripartite model. Various
aspects of the model have undergone review as it got applied from project to project.
A series of meetings were held to deliberate upon and evaluate the various aspects of
the model. The outputs of such meetings formed the basis of this article.

The case organization

The ICED is a national NGO established in Ghana in 1993 for the purpose of
facilitating the development and promotion of small and medium scale enterprises
(SMEs), sustainable trade, gender empowerment, environmental management,
capacity building, and sustainable development in Ghana and Sub-Saharan Africa



44 E. Boon et al.

(SSA). ICED’s activities are mainly in the areas of research, training and capacity
building, and the delivery of extension services through community development
projects. During the last decade, ICED has implemented a number of community
development projects in 10 districts in six regions in Ghana. Table 2 contains the
main projects implemented by ICED between 2000 and 2010. The case study model
was adopted and used in these projects. As part of the assurance for sustainability of
projects, the model is strategically adopted to enhance project success and to build
capacity, transfer knowledge, and learn experiences from stakeholders.

ICED’s Quadripartite Project Participation Model

ICED adopts a Quadripartite Project Management Model (QPPM) in the
management of all its projects. The model consists of a three-tier management
structure comprising local project management teams (LPMTs), national project
management teams (NPMTs), and international project management teams (IPMTs)
with a transversal advisory quality assurance team (QAT). The logical frame of the
model is presented in Figure 1. The roles, responsibilities, obligations, and rights of
these management levels are described in the next sub-sections.

ICED promotes effective communication which enhances the quality of work
of each level of the management structure. As Figure 1 illustrates, there is a two
way information exchange between the IPMT and the NPMT. While funding
mechanisms and contracts issues are vigorously promoted by the IPMT, the NPMT
develops project proposals that reflect the real needs of local communities on the
basis of which the IPMT assists in searching for funding sources. A constant
interaction and exchange of ideas exist between the NPMT and the LPMT and this
facilitates effective planning, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of
projects. Weary of the problems communities could pose to the implementation of
project activities, occasional public hearings with the local communities are jointly
organized by the NPMT and the LPMT. These fora constitute great opportunities
for assessing the effectiveness of the communication between the LPMTs and the
communities. The LPMTs have ample opportunities to meet and interact with the
IPMT members during project monitoring and evaluation missions. This provides
them with the opportunity to discuss their views and appreciation about the
implementation of the projects with the NPMT and the IPMT.

Elements of the model

Local project management teams (LPMTs)

Project beneficiaries in the local communities are key stakeholders in community
development projects. Their inputs in all forms are critical for the success or
otherwise of community projects. To mobilize the members of local communities,
ICED constitutes a LPMT in each of its project communities to be in charge of the
local management and coordination of project activities.

Members of the LPMTs are selected through a transparent, participatory, and
democratic process. On entering a community with an approved project, a forum of
opinion leaders and various stakeholders is called and the idea of a LPMT discussed.
The criteria for selecting members of the LPMT are discussed and the modalities for
selection of members agreed upon. The membership usually includes a chief to
represent the traditional authority because of the influence they wield in the



Community Development 45

Table 2. A SWOT analysis of participation in some projects implemented by ICED, 2000–2010.

Participation SWOT

Name of project Location Donor Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities Threats

(1) Provision of Oyarifa and Flemish community . FUN experience in . New project sites . Expert involvement in . Uncooperating district
Potable Water Gyadam of Belgium similar projects project planning assemblies
2008–2010 . Capable project manager . Peri-urban community

. Receptive NPMT may not avail itself for
community service

. Gyadam youth interests
in mining activities

(2) Sustainable food Hohoe and Sefwi Social fund of the . Organization higher . Size of project . Active community . Chieftaincy problems
production, income Wiawso food industry on learning curve after . Cost of participation involvement . Sectional interest and
generation, and of Belgium implementing earlier, very high . Active individual problems
poverty reduction similar projects . Participation delayed participation
in Ghana (SIP) . Transparent operations some decisions . Vibrant women and

Through non-timber . Capable project manager youth groups
forest resources . Receptive NPMT . Active involvement of
farming 2004–2008 district agriculture unit
(3) Environmental Sefwi Wiawso Groenhart Vzw . Active IPMT involvement . IMPT disagreements . Available local materials . Uncooperating timber

information and district and Flemish . Committed NPMT on time lines . Supportive local firms
education center community of . Community active participation government . Illegal logging by some
and forest Belgium through . Supportive Forestry community members
conservation Flemish fund For commission
tracks in Sui, tropical forests
Ghana. 2006–2009

(4) Support for Hohoe and Sefwi Flemish community . Active IPMT involvement . Participation delayed . Cooperating school . Uncooperating district
basic education Wiawso government of . Committed NPMT some decisions and teachers education office
2006–2009 Belgium implementation . Cooperating community . Uncooperating

in Sefwi Wiawso community in Hohoe

(continued)



46 E. Boon et al.

Table 2. (Continued).

Participation SWOT

Name of project Location Donor Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities Threats

(5) Sustainable food Sissala east and CIDA-FARMER . Very active donor . Over expectations . Cooperating assemblies . No community labor
production, income west districts project involvement and interest for local partners and communities
generation, and . Very active NPMT . Very active involvement
poverty reduction . Very active collaborators of district agriculture
in Ghana (SIP) development unit
through . Strong local leadership
modernized for project activities
Guinea-fowl and
pig production.
2006–2008

(6) Water, health and Sefwi Wiawso TMVW water . Very active donor . None . Cooperating district . None
sanitation project and Damongo company of involvement and interest assemblies
2008–2010 districts Belgium . Very active NPMT . Cooperating partners

. Very active collaborators . Very active community
participation



Community Development 47

Figure 1. The structure of ICED’s quadripartite project participation model.

community; a representative of the youth, women, farmers, religious organizations,
NGOs (if any), teachers, and any other identifiable groups in the community. The
selection of the representatives of these groups is the responsibilities of the various
groups. The qualification for selection includes selfless and committed devotion to
the cause of the group and the ability to command the trust of the community
members. As Munt (2002) advices, these people need to be known by the community
and have a good grasp of cultural complexities, mores and protocols.

The LPMTs perform functions jointly decidedwith theNPMT. The functions of the
LPMTs, with slight variations depending on the type of project and the community,
include the mobilization of community members for communal work; the management
and coordination of project activities at the local level; the selection of beneficiary
community members; collection of community contributions; the operation of project
bank accounts; selection of artisans and local professionals for the provision of technical
services; participating in negotiation of fees for artisans; monitoring and evaluating
project progress; trouble shooting project implementation; recommending remedial
actions; and providing periodic reports to project site supervisors.

National project management team (NPMT)

The NPMT is located at ICED’s head office in Accra headed by the Projects
Manager. Other members of the team include the Accountant, the Research Fellow,



48 E. Boon et al.

the Marketing and Information Manager, and the Project Site Supervisors. The
Chairman of ICED is a patron and advisor to the team. The NPMT has the
responsibility for general management of project activities at the various project
sites. Specifically, the NPMT ensures that effective plans exist for the rollout of
project activities; procurement of project equipment; regular monitoring of project
progress, evaluation of project activities and preparation of project reports for
submission to donors, and other stakeholders. The NPMT is responsible for doing
community diagnosis, needs assessment and proposing appropriate interventions.
Project proposal development is one of the key functions of the NPMT, usually with
inputs from the other stakeholders.

International project management teams (IPMT)

The IPMT is made of the Chairman of ICED, representatives of partner
organizations abroad, representatives of donor agencies, and representatives of the
QAT. The IPMT basically deals with policy issues, including the signing of con-
tracts, agreements and memoranda of understanding, receiving and reviewing
project reports, conducting mid-term and end of term project evaluations, nego-
tiating for funding for new projects, and performing trouble shooting in events of
imminent risk during project implementation.

Quality assurance team (QAT)

ICED’s program areas are so diverse including projects in agriculture, water,
education, forestry, and sanitation. To receive professional and expert advice on
project design, implementation, and evaluation, ICED constitutes the QAT for
each project. ICED has developed a pool of experts in each project area who
are relied upon to provide technical advice in the course of the project life. The
IPMT and project donors are often given the opportunity to appoint indepen-
dent QAT for mid-term and decommissioning evaluation of projects. The QAT
interacts with the NPMT and the LPMTs and offer their expert advice on project
milestones.

A SWOT analysis of stakeholder participation in ICED projects

Stakeholder participation in project management is contextual. In the case of
ICED, the context of participation included the management of several factors
and variables. These include the cooperation of other partners and stake-
holders, whether the community to be engaged is a new or old one, whether the
community is urban or rural, and the learning experience of ICED itself. Other
factors include the project budget, the time frame for executing project activities,
and the proactiveness of the leadership of the beneficiary community. As can be
gleaned from the Table 2, a number of factors were identified under the SWOT
analysis.

Strengths

A number of variables were identified as the strengths of the stakeholder
participation in ICED’s project participation framework. These include the



Community Development 49

learning curve of ICED as the lead implementing agency after implementing several
projects. ICED has acquired some experiences that are contributing to the success-
ful implementation of projects. The receptive nature of the NPMT also facilitated
project implementation as this created the confidence in other partners especially
the LPMTs to cooperate with ICED. The adoption of transparent mechanisms
such as the active involvement of LPMTs and NPMTs and the periodic pre-
paration of reports created another impetus for project success. The active
involvement of collaborating agencies and partners equally helped to enhance
participation.

Weaknesses

ICED had a number of weaknesses, the absence of which will have contributed to
higher project results. ICED occasionally secured projects with very small budgets
which often prevented her from embarking upon capacity building for her partners,
especially the LPMTs. With such small projects, the average cost of participation is
often substantial. New project sites also presented very different challenges and
managing some of them calls for great ingenuity. ICED had some challenges with
logistics especially project vehicles. The distance between Accra and most project
sites and the bad nature of the roads brought a lot of strain on the few project
vehicles.

Opportunities

ICED’s broad base consultation has led to an assembly of experts in various areas of
project management. The technocrats have often been keenly involved in project
planning, implementation, and evaluation. One such key organ is the transversal
QAT which provides the technical backstopping in all project activities. Community
involvement including the role of vibrant women and youth groups has been very
useful. Community involvement has often been translated into active LPMTs and
support for their operation. District agents such as District Agriculture Development
Unit, Forestry Commission, and Business Advisory Centre among others often
provided great leverage for project activities.

Threats

Several factors also acted as threats to the participatory system adopted by ICED.
Projects being implemented in urban and peri-urban centers suffered greatly from
community participation. Similarly, district assemblies with many urban centers
have been very uncooperating in participating in project activities. There is very
great difference in the attitude of district assemblies in the northern, middle, and
southern sectors of Ghana. Districts in the north were more cooperating than their
colleagues in the middle and southern sectors. Communities with sharply divided
sectional interest such as chieftaincy posed a lot of difficulties for participatory
project management. The quadripartite model affords an opportunity for the
harmonization of the synergies of all partners and stakeholders and contributes to
reducing the cacophony of stakeholder participation. The building of bridges
ensures that each partner or stakeholder is able to reach to the unique strengths of
the others.



50 E. Boon et al.

Implications of the model for project management

Stimulation of authentic participation

The model stimulates real and authentic participation by all stakeholders in
project implementation and management process. Project partners, donors, and
the project beneficiary communities actively participate in all phases of project
implementation. Project partners from abroad visit Ghana and the project sites
at least once a year during the period under discussion. Partners either come
as a combined entourage or as individual project monitors and evaluators.
Partners produce assessment reports which are circulated to all project
stakeholders.

Project beneficiary communities have demonstrated keen interest in project
activities. For instance, during the implementation of the water projects, com-
munities with the exception of Wli were readily available to provide communal
labor for the laying of pipes and assisting in constructing other infrastructure.
Community groups are scheduled to work on specific days and are led by their
leaders. Defaulters are usually sanctioned, especially in Sui in the Sefwi Wiawso
District.

Consensus building
Decisions on project implementation are often arrived at in a democratic way and
through consensus building. Project reports are submitted bi-annually and feedback
is received from all project partners regarding the progress achieved and other
concerns that partners might have. In arriving at decisions at the local level, a
consensus is built to enable all parties represented in the LPMT to have their say.
Occasionally, open market meetings or fora are organized to explain issues bothering
on project implementation to the members of the beneficiary communities. For
instance, the LPMTs decide the fees to charge for drawing water from the pipes
provided and deposit the money into a bank. The money is used for maintaining the
water facilities or financing other development projects. The model creates an avenue
for fair representation and active involvement of all segments of the local com-
munity. In Wli for instance, the community together with their LPMT had decided
to charge lower fees for drawing water against the recommendation of the Com-
munity Water and Sanitation Agency, the national body in charge of managing rural
water supplies.

Shared costs
Another positive implication of the model is that it facilitates cost reduction in
project implementation. The model provides members of the communities the
opportunity to contribute communal labor, creating more value for idle labor,
especially during the off-farming seasons. LPMTs provide their inputs at various
stages of the project lifecycle and this contributes to avoiding duplication, waste,
and delays. It also contributes to a reduction in the number of trips to project
sites; information required by the NPMT is often provided by the LPMT. It helps
to reduce staff costs since no project staff of ICED is stationed at any of the
project sites. The model enables early detection of problems and their effective
mitigation.



Community Development 51

Capacity building
The model is an effective instrument for building the organizational and managerial
capacity of local communities. Capacity building programs are organized on a
regular basis for community members and the LPMTs. For example, they are
trained in project management, leadership skills, group dynamics, book keeping,
business management, entrepreneurship, and resource mobilization methods. The
involvement of the communities in project activities and the practical field trips to
showcase project implementation realities are probably some of the best capacity
building opportunities offered to LPMT members.

Fostering networks and partnerships

The model also stimulates and activates the formation of farmer-based organizations
(FBOs) in the beneficiary communities. This provides members with opportunities
to lobby for more development projects for their communities. The establishment of
the non-timber Forest Resources Farmers Association (NTFRFA) as an umbrella
organization and the formation of sub-associations such as Grasscutter Farmers
Associations, Mushroom Farmers Association, and Beekeepers Association, among
others, have strengthened the lobbying capacity and negotiation powers of the local
farmers. The National Board for Small Scale Industries (NBSSI) in Sefwi Wiawso
has consistently relied on these associations for implementing their programs. The
board has succeeded in liaising with rural banks to provide credit to these
associations.

Challenges of the model

Although the quadripartite model has worked very well, its applications revealed
some challenges. In most rural communities, the members are so ‘‘hungry’’ for
development interventions that, once a project idea is discussed, pressure is brought
to bear on the organizers to commence implementation even when the project is yet
to receive approval and funding. Consequently, new projects ideas are often not
discussed in detail with communities and this tends to affect broad base consulta-
tions and participation by the population. This is consistent with the assertion that
after the initial stakeholder analysis and preliminary consultations, a selective
approach to who participates and at what level may be appropriate. This is to ensure
the participation of specific stakeholders whose participation will enhance project
success (ODA, 1995; Brody, 2003). ICED has therefore been very careful in enlisting
the participation of stakeholders in her community development interventions. In
dealing with this challenge, ICED adopts Biggs (1989) contractual–consultative–
collaborative–collegiate model of participation which enables her to engage
stakeholders in different ways. For instance, during project initiation phase, ICED
applies the contractual participation where she assumes the role of a social actor in
the decision-making process. Certain stakeholders are encouraged to participate if
their inputs are considered informative at this stage.

Another challenge of the model relates to the management of the varied interests
especially in the project design phase. During this stage of the project life cycle, there
is a high level of lobbying by communities and stakeholders. This usually poses a
problem for proper need diagnostic as all parties try to paint a picture of dire need
and justify why they must be included in the decision-making process. One group of



52 E. Boon et al.

the latent agenda pushers are the local politicians who are usually the first to be
consulted due to their special positions. However, ICED has tried to insulate herself
from political affiliations because they have the tendency to destroy community
initiatives and projects. Consultative participation is adopted where the process is
driven by ICED with stakeholders being consulted and asked to provide
inputs, especially for identifying priority activities as well as constraints and
opportunities.

In most of the communities, who gets selected into the LPMT sparks some inter-
personal and inter-stakeholder conflicts. Initial speculation over potential personal
benefits and group stakeholder power have been the main reasons for competition to
sit on the LPMT. However, the NPMT often succeeded in resolving such conflicts
with the explanation that membership is voluntary and without any financial
compensation. In some cases, this assurance did not resolve the problem of the
struggle for membership of the LPMTs as most community members consider their
association with project organizers as a prestigious position. Once the LPMT is
constituted to oversee the implementation of the activities, collaborative participa-
tion is often adopted. Here, the LPMTs are considered collaborators where they do
not just provide information but are also offered opportunity to share knowledge
contribute to the decision-making process (Biggs, 1989).

Donor requirements for community contribution have been difficult to manage,
especially if the said contribution is cash-based. In most cases, local communities
provide communal manual labor as their contribution to community development
project. A project responsibility matrix usually identifies the roles of each stake-
holder. Collegiate participation is adopted where the different stakeholders work
together as colleagues or partners and decisions are made by agreement or consensus
by all actors.

Recommendations and conclusion

Managing community development projects in the midst of numerous stakeholders
requires trained sensitivity and a curious orientation. This is mainly because stake-
holders come to the project management table with varied interests and expectations.
It is therefore recommended that project managers and teams adopt a ‘‘system’s
approach’’ to project management built on proper structure and opportunities for
the various stakeholders to contribute to personal and community advancement.
This will help to make project management very effective and efficient and avoid the
kind of conflicts that participation engenders.

Project managers must decide before hand what kind of participation they want
to give to their project management regime. Taking project stakeholders on board
your project management train is an expensive venture, ignoring them is even more
expensive but not deciding whether to involve or not can be suicidal. For reasons of
empowerment, transparency, and sustainability of community projects, project
management teams cannot avoid to ignore stakeholders in their project management
infrastructure.

Further, for ethical reasons and the conscience of project organizers, stake-
holders must be made to participate in the management of community development
projects. If NGOs are altruistic and seek the welfare of communities they work in,
with and for, it is only ethical that the communities to be affected by the project
activities are participants of the project activities. Another ethical reason for



Community Development 53

stakeholder participation in community development projects is to allow donors to
participate in deciding on what they are funding.

Effective monitoring of and reporting on the implementation of project activities
are key to effective participation. Stakeholders’ interest change over time and must
be managed through an effective monitoring, evaluation, and reporting system.
Agreed protocols will only be adhered to if stakeholders know that they will be
required to provide an account of their stewardship. Monitoring ensures that costs
are kept within budgetary limits and that local actors do not assume and arrogate to
themselves critical decisions, especially on financial matters without the consent of
the other stakeholders.

It is also important to note that the development of participation takes time.
There are no quick fixes and NGOs and development agents must develop the
capacities of communities rather than throw their hands in the air in despair.
Capacity building and training must be offered to stakeholders to equip them with
the dynamics of engaging other stakeholders in mutual partnership. In the final
analysis, to involve or not involve stakeholders and local community members in
project management and implementation is not a difficult decision to make. The
most difficult thing to do is who to involve, how to involve them, and what to involve
them in. To manage community development projects successfully requires a well
carved strategy. ICED’s quadripartite model has proved to be most effective in
managing her relationships and communication with her partners and stakeholders.
The model enables an efficient exchange of information and accords stakeholders
the opportunity to input into the project management process. The model is worth
adopting by development actors operating at the community level.

References

Arnstein, S. (1969). A ladder of citizen participation. AIP Journal, 35, 216–224.
Berger-Bartlett, H., & Craig, T. (2002). The challenges of stakeholder participation: Examples

of evaluation projects from the youth justice context. Paper presented at the 2002
Australasian Evaluation Society International Conference October/November 2002,
Wollongong, Australia. Retrieved from www.aes.asn.au

Biggs, S.D. (1989). Resource-poor farmer participation in research: A synthesis of experiences
from nine national agricultural research systems. OFCOR Comparative Study Paper
ISNAR. The Hague: International Service for National Agricultural Research, 3–37.

Bingham, L.B., Nabatchi, T., & O’Leary, R. (2005). The new governance: Practices and
processes for stakeholder and citizen participation in the work of government. Public
Administration Review, 65, 547–558.

Brody, D.S. (2003). Measuring the effects of stakeholder participation on the quality of local
plans based on the principles of collaborative ecosystem management. Journal of Planning
Education and Research, 22, 407–419.

Bunn, M.D., Savage, G.T., Holloway, B.B. (2002). Stakeholder analysis for multi-sector
innovations. Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing, 17, 181–203.

Byrd, T.E. (2007). Stakeholders in sustainable tourism development and their roles:
Applying stakeholder theory to sustainable tourism development. Tourism Review, 62,
6–13.

Chanan, G. (1999). Local community involvement: A handbook for good practice. European
Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, Dublin. Retrieved
from http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/pubdocs/1998/73/en/1/ef9873en.pdf

Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research: Meaning and perspectives in the research
process. Los Angeles: SAGE Publications.

Clulow, V. (2005). Futures dilemmas for marketers: Can stakeholder analysis add value?
European Journal of Marketing, 39, 978–997.



54 E. Boon et al.

Enserink, B., & Koppenjan, J. (2007). Public participation in China: Sustainable urbanization
and governance.Management of Environmental Quality: An International Journal, 18, 459–
474.

Fleming, B. (2009). Participation is the key to empowerment. In P. Bartle (Ed.), Participation
in Appraisal; Community Empowerment Collective. Retrieved from http://www.scn.org/
cmp/modules/par-ben.htm

Glicken, J. (2000). Getting stakeholder participation ‘right’: A discussion of participatory
processes and possible pitfalls. Environmental Science & Policy, 3, 305–310.

Green, A.O., & Hunton-Clarke, L. (2003). A typology of stakeholder participation for com-
pany environmental decision-making. Business Strategy and the Environment, 12, 292–299.

Green, J.F., & Chambers, W.B. (Eds.). (2006). The politics of participation in sustainable
development governance. Tokyo: United Nations Universities Press.

Hansen, H.S., & Mäenpää, M. (2008). An overview of the challenges for public participation
in river basin management and planning. Management of Environmental Quality: An
International Journal, 19(1), 67–84.

Krashinsky, M. (1997). Stakeholder theories of the non-profit sector: One cut at the economic
literature. Voluntas, 8, 149–161.

Munt, R. (2002). Building community participation. Stronger Families Learning Exchange
Bulletin, 2, 3–5.

Ngowi, A.B., & Mselle, P.C. (1998). Community participation in facility management.
Facilities, 16, 314–318.

Osti, R. (2004). Forms of community participation and agencies’ role for the implementation
of water-induced disaster management: protecting and enhancing the poor. Disaster
Prevention and Management, 13(1), 6–12.

Overseas Development Administration. (1995). Note on enhancing stakeholder participation in
aid activities. Retrieved from: http://www.euforic.org/gb/stake2.htm

Pan African Health Organisation. (2008). Manual, chapter 12: Community participation.
Retrieved from http://www.who.or.id/eng/contents/aceh/wsh/books/es/ES12CD.pdf

Prell, C., Hubacek, K., & Reed, M. (2009). Stakeholder analysis and social network analysis in
natural resource management. Society & Natural Resources, 22, 501–518.

Reason, P., & Bradbury, H. (2006). Introduction. In P. Reason & H. Bradbury (Eds.).
Handbook of action research (Concise Paperback Edition). London: SAGE Publications
Ltd.

Reid, J.N. (2002). Community participation: How people power brings sustainable benefits to
communities. USDA Rural Development Office of Community Development. Retrieved
from http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/rbs/ezec/Pubs/commparticrept.pdf

Ruud, van der Helm. (2007). Ten insolvable dilemmas of participation and why foresight has
to deal with them. Foresight, 9, 3–17.

Smith, L.B. (2003). Public policy and public participation engaging citizens and community in the
development of public policy. Retrieved from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/canada/regions/
atlantic/pdf/pub_policy_partic_e.pdf

Vernooy, R. (2005). The quality of participation: Critical reflections on decision making,
context and goals. In J. Gonsalves, T. Becker, A. Braun, D. Campilan, H. De Chavez, E.
Fajber, M. Kapiriri, J. Rivaca-Caminade & R. Vernooy (Eds.), Participatory research and
development for sustainable agriculture and natural resource management: A sourcebook.
Volume 1: Understanding participatory research and development. International Potato
Center-Users’ Perspectives with Agricultural Research and Development, Laguna,
Philippines and International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada. Retrieved
from http://www.idrc.ca/openebooks/181-7/

Woods, N. (2000). The challenge of good governance for the IMF and the world bank
themselves. World Development, 28, 823–841.

World Bank. (1996). The world Bank participation sourcebook. Retrieved from http://www.
worldbank.org/wbi/sourcebook/sb0100.htm

Yang, J., Shen, P.Q., Bourne, L., Ho, C.M.-F., & Xue, X. (2011). A typology of operational
approaches for stakeholder analysis and engagement. Construction Management and
Economics, 29, 145–162.

Zimmerman, M.A. (1990). Toward a theory of learned hopefulness: A structural model
analysis of participation and empowerment. Journal of Research in Personality, 24, 71–86.