Vol. 5(7), pp. 163-170, November, 2013 

 Journal of African Studies and 
DOI: 10.5897/JASD2013.0240 
ISSN 2141-2189 ©2013 Academic Journals Development 
http://www.academicjournlas.org/JASD 

 
 

Review 
 

Policy and institutional perspectives on local economic 
development in Africa: The Ghanaian perspective 

 
James Kwame Mensah*, Kwame Ameyaw Domfeh, Albert Ahenkan and Justice Nyigmah 

Bawole 
 

Department of Public Administration and Health Services Management, P.O Box LG 78, University of Ghana Business 
School, Accra, Ghana. 

 
Accepted 05 September, 2013 

 
Local economic development involves identifying and using primarily local resources, ideas and skills 
to stimulate economic growth and development, with the aim of creating employment opportunities, 
reducing poverty, and redistributing resources and opportunities to the benefit of local residents. 
Growth and development cannot take place in an institutional and legal vacuum. Local development 
and growth require an institutional and legal framework that allows development to take place in an 
orderly manner and in which agents know that the decisions they take and the contracts they make will 
be protected by law, and enforced. This paper examines the policy and institutional frameworks on 
local economic development in Ghana. The paper relies on desk research and secondary documents by 
critically examining and reviewing them. The findings show that over the years several institutions and 
policies have been put in place to help improve development at the local level. It is therefore important 
to build the local capacities and strengthen these institutions to be able to exploit local resources and 
to stimulate economic development at the local level. 
 
Key words: Local economic development, institutions, local government, poverty. 

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Local economic development (LED) as a concept dates poverty, job loss, environmental degradation and loss of 
back to the 1960s and 1970s (Pretorius and Blaauw, community control can best be addressed by community-
2005). However, it was not until the late 1990s that an led, grass-root, integrated approach. Similarly, the Inter-
emphasis on enterprise development, improving infra- national Labour Organization [ILO] (2006) maintains that, 
structure, building local partnerships, and generally LED strategies empower local societies and generate 
promoting an inclusive and dynamic framework became local dialogue; making local institutions more transparent 
the dominant strategy (World Bank, 2003). Overall, LED and accountable and contributing to the development of 
can be seen as local people working together to achieve the local civil society.  This means LED strategies make 
sustainable economic growth that brings economic economic activity dependent on the specific economic 
benefits and improvements in quality of life for all in the conditions and comparative advantages of a defined 
local community (Blakely, 1994; Freund and Lootvoet, territory, generate sustainable employment in firms more 
2004; Gwen et al., 2006; ILO, 2007; World Bank, 2007; capable to withstand changes in the global economic 
Parray and Syebubakar, 2008).  environment, while contributing to a general improvement 

In this sense, LED is founded on the belief that in the quality of jobs as a result of the involvement of 
problems   facing  communities  such  as  unemployment,  local  stakeholders,  and   of   the   rooting   of   economic  

*Corresponding author. E-mail:  mensjam@gmail.com. Tel: +233 24 3467 275. 



 

164          J. Afr. Stud. Dev.  
  
  
  
activities in a territory.  which local governments or community-based organi-

Governments of Africa have identified LED as a key zations engage to stimulate or maintain business activity 
priority to enhance development and governance at the and/or employment. This definition by Blakely means 
local level. that, the principal goal of LED is to stimulate local 

Having realised the importance of LED in rural develop- employment opportunities in sectors that improve the 
ment and particularly poverty reduction, governments in community, using existing human, natural, and insti-
Africa have put in place policies and institutions to tutional resources. A similar definition suggested by 
administer and ensure local development. Indeed, Freund and Lootvoet (2004) is that, it is as “an outcome 
Rodriguez-Pose (2007) is of the view that adequate, based local initiative which involves identifying and using 
solid, and efficient institutions are essential for economic primarily local resources, ideas and skills to stimulate 
development at a local or a regional scale. Just like economic growth and development in order to create 
institutions, policies are important for LED as institutions employment opportunities for local residents, alleviate 
derive their support and mandate from policies. For this poverty, and ensure community empowerment”. 
reason, African governments have had in place some Gwen et al. (2006), in a World Bank report on LED, 
policies and institutions to support LED.  defines LED as a policy approach that is used to build up 

For example, the South African constitution and other the economic capacity of a local area to improve its 
pieces of legislations such as the Local Government economic future and quality of life for all. It is a process 
Transition Act of 1993 and its 1996 Amendment, the by which public, business and non-governmental sector 
Urban Development Strategy, Rural Development Frame- partners work collectively to create better conditions for 
work, White Paper on Local Government and Green economic growth and employment generation. A comple-
Paper on Local Government among others have clearly mentary definition from the South Africa’s Small 
made a case for LED if the country is to develop. In Enterprise Development Agency (SEDA)  is that LED “is 
Kenya, LED has been implemented in seven localities of an approach towards economic development which 
Assela, Nekemte, Awassa, Sodo, Bahridar, Mekele and encourages local people to work together to achieve 
Adigrat as a way of improving rural development through sustainable economic growth, bringing economic benefits 
the Growth and Transformation Plan and the Regional and improved quality of life for all residents in a local 
Development Framework. Ghana has also put in place municipal area” (SEDA, 2008). Parray and Syebubakar 
such measures for LED in rural areas of the country. (2008) conclude it all by arguing that, although there is no 
Among some are policies such as Ghana-Vision 2020, clear definition, LED is generally defined as a strategy to 
GPRS II & II, GSGDA and institutional frameworks such promote economic opportunities and growth at the sub-
NDPC, MLGRD, DAs among others. This paper is national level by addressing constraints and improving 
structured as follows; the first section discusses the the overall business environment to encourage entre-
definitional difficulties surrounding LED, followed by LED preneurial behaviour and investments.  
in Africa and finally the institutional and policy perceptive Although these definitions cannot be taken as the final 
of LED in Ghana.   statement of what LED is, they do provide a broad insight 
 into the overall orientation of the concept. Despite this, 
 LED and its related concepts such as community econo-
Local economic development: definitional difficulties  mic development, self-help and self-reliance strategies 
 appear to have received considerable attention from 
The definitional difficulties surrounding social science scholars in recent years (Abrahams, 2003; Canzanelli, 
concept did not start today neither is it going to end now. 2001; Davis and Catherine, 2005; Eberts, 2005; Freund 
Therefore, LED has also fallen into this trap as many and Lootvoet, 2004; Geddes, 2004; Gwen et al, 2006; 
authors and authorities in the area of regional and local ILO, 2007; Pieterse, 2006; Simon, 2003; World Bank, 
economic development struggle to come to an agreeable 2007). Reese (1993) therefore avers that, “research on 
conclusion of the term. One of the main reasons for this LED has grown exponentially”.  
definitional difficulty stems from how the concept has  
been perceived by various authorities. Thus, it has also  
been variously referred to as self-reliance, local coping, Evolution of local economic development in 
endogenous or bottom-up development, and LED (Taylor developed countries 
and Mackenzie, 1992; Binns, 1995). These different des-  
criptions make the concept to defy rigid definition as to Local Economic Development has been practised for a 
what precisely it involves. In spite of this, attempts have while in wealthy countries such as the United States of 
been made to define the concept. America and the United Kingdom. The reasons attributed 

Blakely (1994) for instance defines it as the  process  in  to the  adoption  of LED strategies in developed countries  

 



 

 Mensah et al.          165 
  
  
  
are many and varied; Nel (2001:1004) accredits this move initiated by government took the form of loans, grants and 
to the so-called development impasse, and the failure of tax breaks. 
earlier development approaches. More specifically,  
Geddes (2004) notes that this came as a result of the  
direct slump in the economic growth of industrialized Local economic development in Africa 
countries after World War II which placed a lot of  
pressure on governments, especially local governments, In Africa, Rodríguez-Pose and Tijmstra (2005) attributed 
to become more innovative in trying to attract investment. the emergence of LED to similar reasons. In this regard, 

The Municipal Services Project (2001) relates the LED evolved as a result of the continuous problems of 
evolution of LED to the failure of traditional top-down slow economic growth and poverty, changes in national 
planning policies and initiatives of government to achieve and international economic environment, and the inability 
meaningful national development objectives leading to a of central governments to intervene at the local level. Nel 
shift in policy focus to target disadvantaged and under- (2001) added that this situation was compounded by 
developed areas. The intention of the policy shift factors such as the debt crisis, forced structural adjust-
according to the Municipal Services Project was to create ment, colossal currency devaluation, and other natural 
favourable conditions such as subsidies and grants, and political shocks.  
aimed at luring investors to areas that were once Similarly, the Municipal Services Project (2001) relates 
deprived of direct investment and subsequent economic the evolution of LED to the failure of traditional top-down 
growth and development. planning policies and initiatives of government to achieve 

According to Geddes (2004), LED in the United meaningful national development objectives leading to a 
Kingdom and the European Union became popular in the shift in policy focus to target disadvantaged and 
1980s as a reaction to the rising problems of un- underdeveloped areas. The intention of the policy shift 
employment caused by economic restructuring and a fall according to the Municipal Services Project was to create 
in industrial activities. Geddes however, notes that during favourable conditions such as subsidies and grants, 
this period LED took the form of closer interaction and co- aimed at luring investors to areas that were once 
operation between local government, community-based deprived of direct investment and subsequent economic 
groups, and trade unions. The rational was based on the growth and development.  
notion that greater government and social interaction Therefore, true LED cases in Africa are thus hard to 
would promote sustainable job creation. This led to the come by as most local governments (LGs) do not even 
establishment of co-operatives and community busines- involve the local businesses in the process of developing 
ses, enterprise zones, urban development corporations, these strategies, and instead initiate much more limited 
and enterprise councils alongside comprehensive training pro-poor initiatives. South Africa is one of the few 
for community members in various disciplines of business countries in Sub-Saharan African region that has been 
and skills development (Geddes, 2004). Later in the officially embarking on LED projects for over a decade. A 
1990s LED initiatives were further entrenched by the focus on so called LED strategies was introduced shortly 
establishment of government funds. after the end of Apartheid (Rogerson, 2002). Although 

The focus of LED in Europe, according to Geddes most of these projects can be considered to be 
(2004), is based on three key principles. Firstly, it empha- community development or so called pro-poor LED 
sized the stimulation of community-based enterprises. projects, the larger metropolitan areas in South Africa, 
Secondly, it envisaged government having a particular such as Johannesburg and Durban, have initiated LED 
role of providing resources for these local initiatives. interventions similar to those in Western Europe, North 
Thirdly, extensive training underpinned most of these America, or parts of Latin America and Asia (Rogerson 
community- based initiatives. This approach to LED is 1999; Nel and Rogerson, 2005). 
comprehensive only that it did not specify the role that In comparison with developed countries, instances of 
each of these players has to play in the process. It is LED in Africa are relatively scarce. The few experiences 
therefore important that in developing a LED strategy, the commonly tend to focus on the social aspect of LED to 
roles of each partner be specified clearly to avoid the disadvantage of its economic side. As Nel and Binns 
confusion and to achieve the intended objective of the (1999:390) put it, “LED in Africa has become identified 
initiative. Dewar (1998) concurs that LED emerged in with self-reliance, survival and poverty alleviation, rather 
North America and particularly in the USA in the early than participation in the global economy, competitiveness 
1970s as a response to a decline in economic growth, and finding market niches”. Therefore, Rodríguez-Pose 
and also as a tool to stimulate it.  and Tijmstra (2005) see this approach as essentially 

These initiatives were especially directed at areas about achieving social rather than economic goals. Thus, 
situated outside  large  cities  and  intervention  programs  they address  vital  problems,  but  tend to focus on short- 

 



 

166          J. Afr. Stud. Dev.  
  
  
  
term issues and on corrective action for the mitigation of critically examined. Also, institutions such as National 
social problems, leaving many of the economic issues Development Planning Commission (NDPC), Ministry of 
that lie at the heart of underdevelopment virtually un- Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD), 
touched (Rodríguez-Pose and Tijmstra, 2005). District Assemblies (Das) among others were examined 
 as major stakeholders in local development in Ghana. 
 The authors critically subjected these documents to a 
Local economic development in Ghana proper analysis which made it possible for them to come 
 out with recommendations and the way forward for LED 
Since Ghana’s independence, successive governments in Africa and specifically in Ghana. 
have pursued with varying degrees of success, policies,  
programs, and projects to accelerate the growth of the  
Ghanaian economy and raise the living standards of the INSTITUTIONAL AND POLICY FRAMEWORKS ON 
people. Even, rural and locality development has been LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN GHANA 
seriously undertaken by various governments, but these  
were not conscious processes to deliberately and strate- The section touches briefly on such initiatives both 
gically foster a LED initiative neither were they named as institutional and policy frameworks.   
such. However, these could be described as LED as they  
recognise and attributed certain roles to local institutions Institutional frameworks for local economic 
for locality development. For instance, the 1961 Local development 
Government Act recognises the responsibility of local  
authorities for the provision of basic services and Some institutions in Ghana over the years have played 
infrastructure. Also, under the National Liberation Council crucial roles in economic development particularly in 
(NLC), regional planning committees were established in relation to rural poverty reduction. This section therefore 
1968 and this was the focus of LED efforts. Again, in identifies and discusses the main institutions that have 
1975, regional business promotion secretariats were had an impact on poverty reduction, either directly or 
created to decentralise the services of Ghanaian Enter- indirectly via their actions and activities. The first and well 
prises Development Commission. In 1981 the National known of this institution is the National Development 
Board for Small Scale Industries (NBSSI) was created an Planning Commission (NDPC). The NDPC is a body 
act (Act 444 of 1981) as a policy maker, policy advisor, created by articles 86 and 87 of the 1992 Constitution of 
monitor/coordinator, programme implementer and the Republic of Ghana and established by Acts 479 and 
registrar of all small and micro-scale activities in Ghana 480 (1994) of Parliament with the mandate to advice the 
as a way of promoting LED.  President on development planning policy and strategy.  

Similarly, there have been some institutions alongside The NDPC is responsible for providing guidelines to 
the various polices to help implement LED development facilitate the preparation of development plans by the 
policies and programmes. Some include the National Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs) 
Development Planning Commission (NDPC), District in accordance with Section 1(3, 4), 2 to 11 of the National 
Assemblies (DAs), Regional Coordinating Councils Development Planning (System) Act 1994 (Act 480). The 
(RCCs) and other NGOs both national and international Guidelines are designed to provide focus and direction on 
alike. In short, there have been various institutions and national development priorities, and enhance harmoni-
policies established over the years through LED to deal sation and rationalisation of development programs, 
with the problem of poverty and thereby reducing poverty projects and activities initiated from the community, 
at the local level.  district, and national levels respectively.  Performing 
 these roles over the years has helped facilitate poverty 
 reduction in Ghana. 
METHODOLOGY Another institution for LED is the District Assembly 
 (DA). In 1988, the governing Provisional National Defence 
The research method for this study was basically desk Council (PNDC) put in place an administrative and 
research methodology. This was done by collecting data political structure that was aimed at supporting a greater 
from existing resources such as policy documents and degree of popular participation in rural development. 
critically examining them. A number of documents such Power was devolved to DAs to enhance service delivery 
as the 1992 constitution of the Republic of Ghana, the for poverty alleviation, and since 1992 the government 
Local Government Act, Act 462 (1993), the Ghana has channelled not less than 7.5% of annual national 
Poverty Reduction Strategy I &II, the Ghana Shared revenue to these Assemblies for development. The DAs 
Growth   and    Development   Agenda    (GSGDA)   were  which were created through the decentralisation  process  

 



 

 Mensah et al.          167 
  
  
  
are now the fulcrum of political, administrative and small-scale industrialists by means of training, manu-
development authority in Ghana. In fact, Helmsing (2003) facturing and the supply of machines, tools, plants and 
emphasised that “as decentralisation is increasingly equipment. GRATIS operates through a network of 
taking place, the question of local economic development Intermediate Technology Transfer Units (ITTUs), now 
is acquiring more significance”. referred to as Regional Technology Transfer Centres 

To reduce rural poverty, the Government of Ghana  has (RTTCs). The RTTCs exist in the ten regions of Ghana 
noted that deliberate and concerted efforts must be made and are responsible for providing hands-on short and 
to eradicate the economic, social, cultural, and political long term training for small business entrepreneurs in 
factors that contribute to mass poverty in the country, areas such as metal fabrication and design, textiles, 
within the framework of sustainable rural development. pottery and soaping making among others. The services 
Specifically, some of the objectives and functions of the provided by GRATIS and the RTTCs are made possible 
local government program which relate to LED are: through the support of the Government of Ghana, the 
devolvement of political and state power in order to European Union (EU), the Canadian International 
promote participatory democracy through local level Development Agency (CIDA), German International 
institutions, and devolvement administration, develop- Cooperation (GIZ), and the British Department Fund for 
ment planning and implementation to the DAs through International Development (DFID). 
the introduction of an effective system of fiscal decen- Rural banks play a significant role in LED.  For rural 
tralization which gives the DAs control over a substantial development to proceed at a smooth pace, credit and 
portion of their revenues.  funding need to be created for the rural folk.  In Ghana, 

In order to effectively undertake poverty reduction institutional sources of credit are the commercial banks 
activities, DAs are required to co-ordinate district level and the Bank of Ghana. Until recently, very few rural 
sectoral programs/projects directed towards poverty people, other than wealthy farmers and businessmen, 
reduction, with support of donors, NGOs and CBOs and had access to credit from these sources. To overcome 
private sector enterprises (MLGRD, 1996). The projects, many of these difficulties, the Government of Ghana, 
programs and activities of DAs in Ghana have been through the Bank of Ghana, introduced the idea of rural 
largely supported by the District Assemblies Common banking into the country in 1976.  According to the 
Fund (DACF), NGOs and donor organisations.  Association of Rural Banks (1992), “The aims of Rural 

The Ministry of Local Government and Rural Develop- Banks are:   
ment (MLGRD) could also be described as a LED  
institution. The MLGRD exists to promote the establish- 1. to stimulate banking habits among rural dwellers;  
ment and development of a vibrant and well resourced 2. to mobilize resources locked up in the rural areas into 
decentralised system of local government, to ensure the banking  systems to facilitate development; and  
good governance and balanced rural based develop- 3. to identify viable industries in their respective 
ment. It also specialises in promoting local government catchment [areas] for investment and development.”  
institutions and in carrying out integrated rural  
development in collaboration with the local organisations It should be noted that rural banking as a tool for rural 
and associations. The functions of the MLGRD include; development has been practiced in countries like Brazil, 
assisting local government institutions in areas such as Argentina, Malaysia, Barbados and other West Indies 
promotion of local government institutions, planning and countries and it is bound to succeed in Ghana as well. So 
coordination, and international aspect including liaising far, rural banks have provided credit facilities to SMEs, 
with local government institutions in other countries. farmers and have financed a host of rural development 
Others are organising rural development programs, policy activities in Ghana.  
guidance, follow-up actions; coordination, foreign assis- Traditional authorities have been in the forefront of 
tance and evaluation. In the nutshell, the MLGRD is the community development all over the country. They are an 
supervisory institution of local government and other local integral part of the nation’s development process and are 
institutions in Ghana and ensures development at the very crucial partners in this direction. This is because 
local level.  culture forms the basis of almost all our development 

Other institutions that are related to LED in Ghana policies and since traditional authorities are the custo-
include the GRATIS foundation, Rural Banks, and Tradi- dians of our culture, it behoves on every policy maker to 
tional Authorities. The GRATIS project was established in involve them in the formulation of development policies. 
1987 and incorporated in 1999 as a Company Limited by Traditional authorities mobilise community groups or civil 
Guarantee with the name GRATIS Foundation. It has the society leaders, encourage volunteerism, promote local 
mandate to promote small-scale industrialisation in participation, public community partnerships, and co-
Ghana through the transfer of appropriate technologies to  operatives. This helps  to  improve  understanding  of  the  

 



 

168          J. Afr. Stud. Dev.  
  
  
  
needs of different partners and strengthen delivery and With over two-thirds of the population residing in rural 
promote accountability and transparency for local deve- areas, a major development goal of the Ghana Vision 
lopment. Economically, traditional authorities throughout 2020 is to reduce disparities between the incomes and 
Ghana now have the “Nkusuohene” (chief in charge of standards of living of rural and urban populations (NDPC, 
development), and recognise the “Nkosuo Stool” whose 1996). The Ghana Vision 2020 policy document states 
occupant mobilises resources for local development, that, the aim of rural development is to upgrade rural 
financial contributions and fund-raising activities help areas socially, economically and environmentally, and to 
raise funds for development. achieve a better balance between rural and urban invest-
 ment (NDPC, 1996:60). In this way improvements in rural 
 living conditions will be promoted, conditions will also be 
Policy frameworks and local economic development created in which productive capacity and the ability to 
in Ghana meet social needs in rural areas could further increase 
 through the provision of an effective enabling environ-
From a legislative and policy perspective, LED in Ghana ment.  
finds accord with the legislation, policies and frameworks This will involve the expansion of the rural services and 
dealing with socio-economic development and poverty shall include: the provision of economic, and social 
reduction since 1994. These Acts, policies, and frame- services in small towns or centres accessible to rural 
works have made provision for government to foster the hinterlands; improvements in the physical infrastructure 
growth of local economies to address local needs and to to facilitate access and communications to and between 
formulate strategies to address job creation and com- service centres; and the efficient operation of service 
munity development. Below is a highlight of a few of such using the infrastructure. The guidelines for the rural 
pieces of legislation and policies. development component of the Ghana Vision 2020 fall 

The first of these is the Constitution of the Republic of under the following headings: institutional structures in 
Ghana, 1992. As the supreme law of the country, the support of rural development, district and regional plan-
Constitution recalls most prominently the developmental ning capacities, community participation, trans-formation 
and pro-poor responsibilities that the government, of the rural economy, private sector initiatives, extension 
especially local government, has in Ghana. Provision has services and technology transfer, and environmental 
been made in Chapter 20, Article 245 of the Constitution protection (NDPC, 1996:63-64). 
for local government to promote social and economic The country’s key framework for policies and allocating 
development. The Constitution goes further to establish resources during the period 2003 to 2009 was the Ghana 
the District Assemblies Common Fund (DACF) where Poverty Reduction Strategy I & II (GPRS I & II). The first 
parliament shall annually make provision for the allocation version of this strategy, referred to here as GPRS I, 
of not less than five percent (it has been increased to covered the period 2003-2005. This policy sought to 
7.5%) of the total revenues of Ghana to the DAs for foster private sector-led growth while at the same time 
development (Constitution of the Republic of Ghana, investing in human and physical infrastructure. The goal 
1992). Another important section in the 1992 constitution of the GPRS I was to create wealth by transforming the 
is the Directive Principles of State Policy. Article 36 (2) nature of the economy to achieve growth, accelerated 
(d) states that the state shall undertake even and ba- poverty reduction, and the protection of the vulnerable, 
lanced development of all regions and every part of each which is excluded within a decentralized, democratic 
region of Ghana and in particular, improving conditions of environment (NDPC, 2002). Under the GPRS I, DAs 
life in the rural areas and generally redressing any were to become the key level of planning and implemen-
imbalance in development between the rural and urban tation of development programs.  
areas. In 2006 the government of Ghana introduced another 

The Government of Ghana set “Ghana-Vision 2020” as poverty reduction strategy called the GPRS II. Ghana 
a development strategy aimed at creating a stable macro- Poverty Reduction Strategy II was prepared in response 
economic environment and implementing a decisive to the changing circumstances in the well-being and 
structural transformation to foster strong economic poverty situation of Ghanaians. Therefore, while the 
growth and a broad-based improvement of living stan- GPRS I focused on poverty reduction programs and pro-
dards. There are five basic themes of development in the jects, the emphasis of GPRS II is on the implementation 
Ghana Vision 2020 document namely; human develop- of growth-inducing policies and programs which have the 
ment, economic growth, rural development, urban potential to support wealth creation and sustainable 
development, and an enabling environment (NDPC, poverty reduction. Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy II 
1996). This paper is particularly interested in the rural seeks to make its greatest impact in agricultural and 
development component as it is directly linked to LED. industrial   production  by  removing  obstacles  to  private  

 



 

 Mensah et al.          169 
  
  
  
sector development, expanding employment oppor- functions within their own jurisdiction and locality. Local 
tunities for all sectors of the economy, ensuring that the authorities are empowered to innovate policies and 
benefits of growth are widely shared, and encouraging strategies that will help them reduce poverty and gene-
social partners to implement social protection services rate employment. Various institutions and policies have 
(NDPC, 2006). played this role over the years and in fact there is no time 

However, GPRS I&II have been hampered by lack of than now that local authority must be fully strengthened 
clarity about their role and insufficient knowledge to perform this role. 
concerning LED. Also lacking are suitable institutions to As an all inclusive process, LED requires continuous 
bring together assemblies, local authorities, the private sensitization, awareness creation, information-sharing 
sector, and other members of the community.  and training for communities and other stakeholder to 

In 2008, the National Democratic Congress won the facilitate effective participation in sustainable partnerships 
presidential election and assumed power in 2009. The that must be built by the LGs. Even though, a local 
government subsequently introduced the Ghana Shared approach, the central government and the private sector 
Growth and Development Agenda (GSGDA I, 2010-2013) has an important role to play in the process. It is the role 
in 2009. The major development thematic areas in this of the central government to create an enabling and 
policy document are: Ensuring and sustaining macro- regulatory environment that supports LED, while private 
economic stability; enhancing competitiveness in sector institutions should contribute financial resource, 
Ghana’s private sector; accelerated agriculture moderni- technology, marketing and supply linkages to support 
sation and sustainable natural resource management; oil LED.  
and gas development; infrastructure, energy and human Ordinary citizens have to take on new responsibilities to 
settlements; human development, productivity and participate in decision making, in execution of partnership 
employment; transparent and accountable governance programmes and to exercise oversight to government. 
(NDPC, 2010). The details are provided in the GSGDA Training institutions are indispensable for capacity 
2010-2013, which should be used together with NDPC building for all stakeholders in the LED process. There is 
guidelines in the preparation of the District Medium Term therefore the need to seize the opportunity presented by 
Development Plans (DMTDPs) by the DAs. The the ongoing decentralization and reforms to develop 
guidelines also emphasize on ensuring that the Millen- adequate capacity for specialized training of local 
nium Development Goals (MDGs), New Partnership for government personnel in the area of LED. The LGs, 
Africa Development (NEPAD), and other cross-cutting which occupy a pivotal position in the LED process, need 
issues such as gender and environmental sustainability to overcome their lack of political power, authority, finan-
among others are integrated in the DMTDP. cial resources and technical capacity. Through effective 
 and proper implementation of LED, localities can attain 
 fast local growth that is broad based and inclusive for 
SUMMARY, POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS AND poverty reduction. 
CONCLUSION   
  

REFERENCES 
The current poverty in Africa arguably can be considered 

 
as a sum of the legacy to cumulative effects of success- Abrahams D(2003) “Local Economic Development in South Africa: A 
sive failures in top down development strategies pursued Useful Tool for Sustainable Development”. Urban Forum, 14 (2):3. 

after independence in the 1960s and of recent Association of Rural Banks (1992). Annual Reports. Unpublished 
Report on file at the Association of Rural Banks. The Bank of Ghana, 

developments including globalisation that have margina-
Accra, Ghana. 

lized the poor countries’ economies and accentuated Blakely EJ (1994). Planning Local Economic Development: Theory and 
nd

income disparities, particularly in the rapidly growing Practice, 2  Edition (48). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 

cities. This makes it imperative for Africa countries to Canzanelli G (2001). Overview and Learned Lessons on Local 
Economic Development: Human Development and Decent Work. ILO 

adopt locally/regionally driven development processes. 
and Universities Working Paper, Geneva. 

LED, which places emphasis on exploiting local resour- Davis J, Catherine R.(2005). Addressing Poverty through Local 
ces and building local capacity to stimulate economic Economic and Enterprise Development: A Review of Conceptual 

development and poverty reduction, presents itself as the Approaches and Practice. Working paper 3. Chatham, Natural 
Resources Institute. 

obvious alternative.  
Dewar ME (1998). Why State And Local Economic Development 

The foregoing review of the policy and institutional Programs Cause So Little Economic Development. Econ. Dev. Q. 
environment in Ghana shows that the national environ- 12(68):87. 

ment is opportune for LED strategy in Ghana. The gover- Eberts R (2005). Overview of State and Local Economic Development 
Policies and Practice in the United States. http://www.jil.go.jp/events. 

nance and administrative structure in Ghana has given 
accessed on 10/09/2010. 

space   for   local   authorities   to   exercise  development  Freund B,Lootvoet B (2004). Local Economic Development: Utopia  and 

 



 

170          J. Afr. Stud. Dev.  
  
  
  

Reality in South Africa: The example of Durban. Kwazulu-Natal. Nel E, Rogerson C (2005). Pro Poor Local Economic Development in 
University of Kwazulu-Natal. South Africa's Cities: Policy and Practice. Africa Insight. 35(4):55. 

Geddes M (2004). Linking Local Economic Development to Anti-Poverty Parray O, Syebubakar A (2008). Poverty Reduction through Local 
Strategies: Experiences in the United Kingdom and the European  Economic Development: “Pathway out of Poverty” in Indonesia. 

Government of Ghana: The Constitution of Republic of Ghana, 1992. Pieterse E(2006). A Framework to Link Local Economic Development to 
Gwen S, Soraya G, Fergus M (2006). Local Economic Development: A Anti-Poverty Strategies. http://www.dplg.gov.za. Retrieved December 

Primer Developing and Implementing Local Economic Development 19, 2010. 
Strategies and Action Plans. Washington DC: World Bank. Pretorius A, Blaauw D (2005). Local Economic Development Agencies 

Helmsing AJH (2003). “Local Economic Development: New Generators in South Africa Paper presented at the Economic Society of South 
of Actors, Policies and Instruments for Africa” In Public Administration Africa Biennial Conference, 7-9 September 2005. Elangeni Holiday 
and Development (23):67-76 Inn, Durban, KwaZulu-Natal. 

International Labour Organisation [ILO] (2006). Working out of Poverty Reese LA (1993). Categories of Local Economic Development 
in Ghana: The Ghana Decent Work Pilot Program. ILO – Ghana Techniques: An Empirical Analysis. Policy Stud. General 21(3):492-
Decent Work Pilot Program Office; Accra, Ghana. 506. 

International Labour Organisation [ILO] (2007). Local Economic Rodríguez-Pose A,Tijmstra S (2005). Local Economic Development as 
Development in Ghana: Rooting Public-Private Dialogue. ILO – an alternative approach to economic development in Sub-Saharan 
Ghana Decent Work Pilot Program Office; Accra, Ghana. Africa: A Report for the World Bank. Houghton, London. 

Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (1996). The New Rogerson CM (2002). Planning Local Economic Development: Policy 
Local Government System, (2nd. Edition). Published by the Ministry Challenges from the South African experience. Africa Insight. 
of Local Government and Rural Development, Accra. 32(2):39-45. 

Municipal Services Project (2001). Local Economic Development Simon D (2003). Contextualising South African Local Economic 
Debates in South Africa. Occasional Paper No. 6. Cape Town: Development within current development debates: The International 
Municipal Services Project. Setting. Urban Forum 14(2):3. 

National Development Planning Commission (1997). Ghana Vision Taylor DRF, Mackenzie F (Eds) (1992). Development from Within: 
2020: National Development Policy Framework, First Step (1997 – Survival in Rural Africa. London: Routledge. 
2000). Assembly Press, Accra, Ghana. Union. www.local.gov.za/ DCD /ledsummary/ledo5 accessed on 

National Development Planning Commission (2006). Growth and 11/10/2010. 
Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRS II) 2006-2009. Easy Reading World Bank (2003). Local economic development A Primer: Developing 
Version: Accra, Ghana, NDPC. and Implementing local economic development Strategies and Action 

National Development Planning Commission (NDPC) (2002), Ghana Plans. Washington DC: World Bank. 
Poverty Reduction Strategy 2003-2005: An Agenda for Growth and World Bank (2007). Local Economic Development .World Bank. 
Prosperity, Vol. 1, An Analysis and Policy Statement, NDPC, Accra. Washington DC. www.worldbank.org. Accessed on 30/10/2010. 

National Development Planning Commission (NDPC) (2005), Growth  
and Poverty Reduction Strategy (GPRSII) 2006-2009, NDPC, Accra.   

Nel E (2001). Local Economic Development: A Review and Assessment 
of its Current Status in South Africa. Urban Studies 38(7):1003-1024.  

Nel E,  Binns T (1999). Beyond the Development Impasse: The Role of  
Local Economic Development and Community Self-Reliance in Rural  
South Africa. J. Modern Afr. Stud. 37(3):389-408.