© Kamla-Raj 2011

J Hum Ecol, 33(1): 1-9 (2011)

Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs):
Clearing the Confusion in Semantics
Albert Ahenkan1 and Emmanuel Boon2
Human Ecology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium
E-mail: 1<aahenkan@vub.ac.be>, 2<eboon@vub.ac.be>
KEYWORDS Cultivation. Domestication. Ecology. Forestry. Forest Resources. Non-Timber Forest Products
ABSTRACT Though a significant volume of information has been documented on the importance and potential of NTFPs’
utilisation and its impacts on poverty reduction, livelihoods improvement and environmental sustainability, a lot of confusion
is still associated with NTFPs semantics and terminologies. NTFPs have proved to be difficult to clearly define because of the
blurred boundaries between timber and non-timber products and the underlying difficulty in defining a forest. The overabundance
of terminologies relating to a single term having a range of interpretations, and none of which is universally recognised is at the
heart of the NTFPs semantic confusion. Consequently, the meaning of “NTFPs” has generated a lot of controversy. In other
words, there is no universally accepted operational definition of NTFPs. Various definitions proposed in literature tend to
expound on specific species, aspects and products according to different authors’ focal interests. The increasing realisation of
the importance of all forest resources makes the dichotomisation of forest resources into “timber” and “non-timber” overly
simplistic. The lack of a common definition, terminologies as well as the multiplicity of interest, constitutes a real hindrance to
research on and development of NTFPs. Through an extensive and critical review of literature and consultations with experts,
this paper examines the semantics and the difficulties in defining NTFPs, the ensuing confusion and the consequences for
research, and development and promotion of these products.

1. INTRODUCTION
The past decade has witnessed a rapid growth
of interest in non-timber forest products (NTFPs)
among conservation and development
organisations (Arnold and Ruiz Pérez 1998;
Wollenberg and Ingles 1998; Neumann and
Hirsch 2000; Marshall et al. 2003). There are a
number of reasons for the general spread and
upsurge in global interest in NTFPs. It is believed that the promotion of sustainable use of
NTFPs could lead to a win-win situation for
poverty reduction and bio-diversity conservation (FAO 1995; Shiva and Verma 2002; Golam
et al. 2008). This is due to the increasing recognition that NTFPs can contribute significantly
to the livelihoods of forest dependent communities (Clendon 2001; Belcher et al. 2005;
Marshall et al. 2005; Ros-Tonen and Wiersum
2005; FAO 2006; Ahenkan and Boon 2010);
household food security and nutrition (FAO
1995; Falconer 1997; Clark and Sunderland
2004; Shacleton and Shackleton 2004; Ahenkan
and Boon 2008); generate additional employment and income (Peters 1996; Ros-tonen 1999;
Andel 2000; Marshall et al. 2003); and offer
opportunities for NTFP based enterprises
(Shackleton and Shackleton 2004; Subedi 2006).
Moreover, NTFPs are more accessible to the poor
(Saxena 2003); contribute to foreign exchange
earnings (Andel 2000; Shiva and Verma 2002);

and support biodiversity and other conservation
objectives (FAO 1995; Arnold and Ruiz Pérez
1998; Marshall et al. 2005; Charlie and Sheona
2004). Furthermore, NTFPs can be harvested
with relatively little impact on the forest environment (Myers 1988; Neumann and Hirsch
2000; FAO 2008).
The significance of NTFPs effectively captured the imagination of conservationists around
the world when an article by Peter et al. (1989)
published in ‘Nature’ claimed that more money
could be earned from tropical forests by collecting these products than from logging
(Choudhury 2007). Since then, the importance
of NTFPs has moved to the centre stage of the
global development agenda. The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) of the United Nations was one of the first agencies to promote
NTFPs through their programme on non-wood
forest products. Over the past 20 years, other
international agencies such as the World Bank,
Canadian International Development Agency
(CIDA), International Development Research
Centre (IDRC), Center for International Forestry
Research (CIFOR), International Union for the
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and the Biodiversity Support Programme (BSP), among others, have incorporated the concept of NTFPs into
their research and development programmes.
The concept of NTFPs, therefore, became an
economically acceptable ecological option of

2

ALBERT AHENKAN AND EMMANUEL BOON

development. There was also an as-sumption,
often implicit (Belcher 2003), that making forests more valuable to local users can encourage
forest conservation and poverty reduction
(Plotkin and Famolare 1992; Schreckenberg et
al. 2006; Ahenkan and Boon 2008; Mbuvi and
Boon 2008).
NTFP-based development was, therefore, born
as a new development paradigm (Choudhury
2007) capable of accommodating many conflicting needs of forest depending communities.
Within the context of emerging new international commitments to address rural poverty,
such as the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), the commercialisation of NTFPs is
recognised as having the potential to achieve
dual conservation and development goals by
increasing the value of forest resources to local
communities for poverty reduction and human
development (FAO 1995; Wollenberg and Ingles
1998; Neumann and Hirsch 2000; Marshall et
al. 2003; Wunder and Angelsen 2003; Sunderland and Ndoye 2004). Globally, inter-national trade in NTFPs is estimated at USD 11billion annually (Ndoye and Ruiz Pérez 1998;
Shiva and Verma 2002; Marshall et al. 2005;
Ahenkan and Boon 2010). These products provide a “green social security” to billions of
people in the form of low-cost building materials, income, fuel, food supplements and traditional medicines. In some cases, the revenues
earned from NTFPs are the only source of cash
income, which increases the dependency of
people on commercially interesting NTFPs resources (Andel 2000; Sheil and Wunder 2002;
Marshall et al. 2005).
2. DEFINING NTFPS AND THE
CONFUSION IN SEMANTICS
Despite the surge in importance of NTFPs
and the significant global interest surrounding
them, a number of basic definition and conceptual issues remain unresolved. The term
“NTFPs” has proved difficult to define amongst
forest experts, conservationists, development
organisations and the pioneers of the concept
due to some of the blurred boundaries between
timber and non-timber products, the underlying difficulty in defining a forest and the evolving nature of the concept and the potential to
bring together a diverse set of interests and experiences to the idea of integrated forest man-

agement. Consequently, the term “NTFPs” has
generated a lot of controversy as regards its
meaning (Arnold and Ruiz-Perez 1998; RosTonen et al. 1998; Shiva and Verma 2002;
Belcher 2003). The debate on the definition of
NTFPs has raged on since the term was coined
during the early 1980s by authors like Posey,
Peters, de Beer and McDermott (Neumann and
Hirsch 2000; Jean-Laurent and Patrick 2002;
Belcher 2003). Though significant information
has been documented on the socio-economic
importance and potential of NTFPs utilization
and their impacts on poverty reduction, livelihood improvement and environmental sustainability, little progress has been made to clear
the accruing confusing in terminology and semantics. There is an overabundance of terminologies which has been used interchangeably
by various authors and organisations with terms
such as ‘‘non-wood forest products, minor forest products”, “forest biological resources”, special forest products”, “non-wood forest benefits”
“non-wood goods and services”, “forest garden
products”, “wild products”, “natural products”,
“non-timber forest products”, “by-products of
forests”, “secondary forest products” “minor
forest products’’, and ‘‘hidden harvest’’
(Chandrasekharan 1995; FAO 1999; Wunder
and Angelsen 2003; FAO 2006).
In 1995, FAO attempted a first step towards
a harmonised definition of NTFPs by organising
the “International Expert Consultation on NonWood Forest Products” in Indonesia to agree on
a common definition. Unfortunately, there is still
no universally accepted definition of NTFPs and
the confusion over the definition and scope of
‘NTFP’ continues. There is still no agreement
on universally acceptable terminology to describe the product (FAO 1999; Wong 2000; Bih
2008). It has become very difficult to distinguish
between NTFPs from natural forests and those
from human-influenced systems and the fact that
the study of non-timber forest products has been
dealt with by people from varied fields of study
such as forestry, ethnobiology, economic botany,
social development, natural resource economics, conservation biology, protected area management, agro-forestry, marketing, commercial
development, ecological anthropology, cultural
geography and human ecology has complicated
the problem (Bih 2008; Ahenkan and Boon
2010).
Even the terms ‘forest’ and ‘product’ are

3

NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS

debatable (FAO 2001; Ahenkan and Boon 2010).
Literally, NTFPs includes all products that are
derived from forests with the exception of timber. In practice, various products and production environments are included or excluded depending on the objectives of the author (Belcher
et al. 2005). The lack of a common definition
and terminology and the multiplicity of interest
are been regarded as hindrances to research and
development of NTFPs (Belcher 2003). The difficulty in harmonising the definition of NTFPs
also makes comparison of studies and statistics
on NTFPs very difficult particularly because of
the different definitions and classifications used
by the different authors and in which some products are included while others are excluded. It
has further limited the creation of a comprehensive and consistent classification system on
NTFPs (Belcher and Ruiz-Pérez 2001), which
can only be based on an agreed terminology including clear definitions. Belcher et al. (2005)
note that the discussion has been confounded
by ambiguous and inconsistent definitions of the
term ‘‘NTFP’’ and by the very different approaches that have been followed to research
and develop NTFPs. This has hindered the understanding of the role and potential of NTFPs
for livelihood improvement and conservation
(Belcher et al. 2005).
Nevertheless, several attempts have been
made by different authors and international institutions to find an “acceptable norm” for defining NTFPs (de Beer and McDermott 1989;
Peters 1989; Chandresekharan 1995; FAO 1995;
Ros-Tonen et al. 1995; Peters 1996; FAO 1999;
Wong 2000; Shiva and Verma 2002; Marshall
and Schreckenberg 2005; Ahenkan and Boon
2008). However, most of the NTFPs definitions
proposed in the literature also tend to expound
on specific species, aspects and products in line
with different authors’ focal interests (FAO
1995; Morris and Bay 2002; Mbuvi and Boon
2008).
As has already been mentioned, the important elements of the debate over the concept of
NTFP depend on the interests and priorities of
the proponents and are usually centred on five
main issues;
• The Nature of the Product – inclusion/
exclusion of non-industrial timber and
other wood products (Jean and Patrick
2002; Belcher 2003),
• The Source of the Product – inclusion/

Box 1: Definition of NTFPs
De Beer and McDermott (1989)
The term “Non Timber Forest Products” (NTFPs) encompasses all biological materials other than timber, which
are extracted from forests for human use.
Chandresekharan (1995)
Non-wood forest products include all goods of biological origin, as well as services, derived from forest or any
land under similar use, and exclude wood in all its forms:
Ros-Tonen et al. (1995, 1998)
“all tangible animal and plant products from the forest,
other than industrial wood” In 1998, they slightly modified this definition to include
“....all tangible animal and plant forest products other
than industrial wood, coming from natural forests, including managed secondary forests and enriched forests.
Mathur and Shiva (1996)
All products obtained from plants of forest origin and
host plant species yielding products in association with
insects and animals or their parts and items of mineral
origin except timber, may be defined as Minor Forest
Products (MFP) or Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP)
or Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFP).
M. P. Shiva (1998)
All usufructs/utility products of plant, animal and mineral origins except timber obtainable from forests or afforested / domesticated land areas are termed as NonTimber Forest Products (NTFP) or Non-Wood Forest
Products (NWFP)/Minor Forest Products (MFP).
FAO (1999)
Non wood forest products (NWFP) are defined as ‘goods
of biological origin other than wood derived from forests, other wooded lands and trees outside forests’ (FAO
1999).
Wong(2000)
‘...all products derived from biological resources found
on forest land but not including timber, fuelwood, or medicinal plants harvested as whole plants’
Source: Rajesh Rajchal 2006; Pfund and Patrick Robinson
2002

exclusion of forest/tree plantations, managed forest, grassland, managed agroforestry systems within agricultural land,
• The Nature of Production of the Product–
gathered only from the wild, or include those that are domesticated (e.g. rubber, mushrooms, snails, oil palm and other industrial
tree plantation crops) (Belcher 2003),
• The Scale of Production – capital intensive,
industrial scale versus small scale mixed
systems,
• The Ownership and Distribution of Benefits
(Ros-Tonen 1999; Belcher 2003; Marshall
et al. 2005).
The debate also centres on the expected contribution of NTFPs to poverty reduction, health,
conservation as well as on their current and
potential benefits to the poor communities versus their further impoverishment (FAO 1995;
Peters 1996; Pfund and Patrick Robinson 2002).

4
At the centre of the debate over NTFPs is
whether or not to include woody plant material
and products in the definition, the question of
whether the product or service is produced in a
forest environment; what exactly is a forest; and
the more problematic question of whether an
NTFP is really an NTFP if it is cultivated. Some
argue that if the product has been domesticated
and produced outside a forest environment, then
it is no longer a ‘forest product’. An important
question that has been raised is whether nontimber forest products are only those biological
resources that originate from within natural forests (Ros-Tonen 1999; Belcher 2003; Rajesh
Rajchal 2006). This raises a whole different set
of questions as to how a natural forest is defined and whether the concept of NTFP should
be tied to such a definition. Intractable and
thorny questions include whether products such
as honey, mushrooms, medicinal plants and
fruits harvested from the forest and the ones
domesticated or under managed regimes should
all be classified as NTFPs. Should grass-cutters
and snails from the forest and the ones produced
under managed regimes be included as NTFPs
or a chanterelle harvested from a planted jack
pine plantation from a natural regeneration,
post-fire jack pine stand is included? (Belcher
2003; Ros-Tonen 2000).
The controversy about whether or not to include cultivated products of forest origin in the
definition of NTFPs is as old as the term itself.
According to de Beer and McDermott (1989),
who were among the pioneers writers on the
subject, NTFP “encompasses all biological materials other than timber which are extracted
from forests for human use”. They defined ‘forest’ as a natural ecosystem in which trees are a
significant component. However, forest products
are derived not only from trees, but also from
all plants, fungi and animals (including fish)
for which the forest ecosystem provides habitat.
Clark et al. (2004) argue that products such as
Gnetum occur naturally in forest openings, but
are also found in secondary forests, fallow fields
and sometimes in mixed crop fields. Thus, there
is a continuum from ‘wild’ or ‘forest’ resources
to cultivated and domesticated ones. In other
words, it is often difficult to decide whether a
resource should be described as an NTFP or as
an agricultural product.
This controversy has led to some of the
NTFPs pioneers, including Ros-Tonen et al.

ALBERT AHENKAN AND EMMANUEL BOON

(1995) and Belcher (2003), attempt to redefine
the term NTFP in order to distinguish between
forest products collected from the ‘wild’ and
domesticated products of forest origin. For instance, Ros-Tonen et al. (1995) defined non-timber forest products as “all tangible animal and
plant products from the forest, other than industrial wood”. But in 1998, they slightly modified this definition to include “all tangible animal and plant forest products other than industrial wood, coming from natural forests, including managed secondary forests and enriched
forests (Ros-Tonen et al. 1998) because in practice, the distinction between ‘wild’ and semicultivated products is often difficult to make
(Ros-Tonen et al. 1998; Belcher 2003).
The fact is that many items that are being
marketed as NTFPs originate both from natural
forests and from man-made vegetation types and
domestication. Economically successful NTFPs
in particular tend to be domesticated (Homma
1992). Van Dijk, J. Wiersum (1999) note that a
high proportion of the NTFPs exploited in
Southern Cameroon are not collected from natural forests, but harvested from vegetation types
modified by man and domestication. In the transition from ‘wild’ to cultivated products, several NTFPs may come from both natural forests
and home gardens or plantations. The best
known example is that of rubber from Hevea
brasiliensis, which is collected from natural forests in Brazil, while in Indonesia it comes from
plantations. The same occurs within one and
the same country with gum Arabic from Acacia
senegal in Sudan and rosin and turpentine made
of the oleoresin of Pinus merkusi in Indonesia
(Coppen 1999). When such products appear on
the market, they bear no label to clarify their
origin.
The problem of the concept of NTFPs also
lies in the fact that the distinction between natural and human-modified forest ecosystems and
products cannot always be easily drawn. There
is often a gradual transition from the collection
of ‘wild’ products in natural forests to enrichment planting in secondary forest and intensively managed home garden production (RosTonen et al. 1995). Belcher (2003) also argues
that, from the perspective of a forest user and
from a development perspective, even the distinction between timber and non-timber products is false because within systems where communities have control over forest resources,

5

NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS

people manage forest products that are most
valuable to them. By creating such a distinction
between wood and non-wood products could
have negative consequences in terms of both
conservation and development, because it contains and supports the implicit assumption that
timber is for the rich and that NTFPs are for the
poor (Belcher 2003).
Various studies, including Tropenbos (1999),
also raise this problematic and Hammen and
Rodríguez (1996) illustrate how indigenous
people in the Colombian Amazon region manipulate forest succession in order to promote
the growth of such useful species as the
chontaduro palm (Bactris gasipaes) and the
guamo fruit tree (Inga spp.). De Jong et al.
(2000) provide an example of the evolution of a
man-made vegetation type in West Kalimantan,
which appears to be a match for natural forest
in biological diversity. Some authors prefer to
restrict the use of the term NTFPs to products
from natural forest systems, whether they are
modified by human intervention or not (RosTonen 2000). The reason for doing so lies in
the fact that the term was coined in relation to
strategies for the conservation of biodiversity
in natural forests (Ros-Tonen 1998). Several
alternative terms have been suggested for products from man-made vegetation types, such as
forest garden products (Senanayake 1999), nontimber plantation products (Ros-Tonen 2000) or
agroforestry products (Ottens 1999). Others too
restrict the category to ‘‘extractive’’ products that
are collected from the wild (natural regeneration), while others include managed or cultivated products. Some restrict their discussion
to plants, while some include animals. Planted
forests, grasslands, or other environments may
or may not be included. As a result, generalisations about NTFPs are confusing at best, and
can lead to the formulation of inappropriate
policies. Belcher et al. (2005) note that if we
take the perspective of forest-dwelling people,
we might even consider replacing the term
NTFPs with “community-exploited forest products”, even if this might be confusing in relation to FAO statistics, in which forest products
mostly refer to wood products. From a local perspective, the real issue is not whether these locally exploited products are timber or non-timber, but how they can be managed so that they
contribute optimally to people’s livelihoods and
can be harvested with minimal damage to the

forest. Ros-Tonen et al. (1998) note that the transitions are so gradual and the products remain
the same, why should we bother about the terminology?
World-wide, NTFPs are produced and harvested under a broad range of management regimens, ranging from strictly wild harvested,
semi-domesticated and more intensively managed systems (CNTR 2006). Harvesting options
range from gathering from the wild through to
intensive cultivation (Ros-Tonen and Wiersum
2003; Ahenkan and Boon 2010). Belcher et al.
(2005) therefore proposes a sub-division of the
NTFPs continuum into three main categories:
wild, managed, and cultivated. The wild products are gathered from fallow, secondary forests or mature forests, with little transformation of forest structure due to the extraction of
NTFPs. Regeneration often depends on natural
processes, and forests are left by and large to
natural successional stages. Managed products
are produced in forests that are partially transformed through treatments such as weeding
or crown opening to encourage the production
of preferred species. Target species regenerate
through natural processes, and natural succession still operates, allowing for multiple uses
of the forest and maintaining relatively high
biodiversity. Cultivated NTFPs are those deliberately planted as seeds or seedlings or breeding stocks such as grass-cutters and snails. For
example, Dacryodes edulis (safou fruit) and
Irvingia gabonensis (‘bush mango’) have been
included as NTFPs. These fruit trees grow in
natural forest areas but are also widely cultivated, and in many areas, the majority of fruits are
harvested from cultivated trees (Schreckenberg
et al. 2006).
3. CLASSIFICATION OF NTFPS
A globally applicably standard classification
system for NTFPs does not exist (Shiva and
Verma 2002). However, NTFPs can be classified in many different ways: according to end
use (medicine, food, drink, etc), by the part used
(roots, leaves, barks, etc); or in accordance with
major international classification systems such
as the Harmonized Community Description and
Coding System developed under the auspices of
the Customs Cooperation Council (Shiva and
Verma 2002). For the purpose of this research,
NTFP are classified according to their end uses
as indicated in Table 1.

6

ALBERT AHENKAN AND EMMANUEL BOON

Table 1: Categories of non- timber forest products
Plant products
Categories

Description

Food

Vegetal foodstuff and beverages provided by
fruits, nuts, seeds, roots
Fodder
Animal and bee fodder provided by leaves,
fruits etc.
Medicines
Medicinal plants (e.g.leaves, bark, roots) used
in traditional medicine and/or by pharmaceutical companies
Perfumes and Aromatic plants providing essential (volatile)
cosmetics
oils and other products used for cosmetic
purposes
Dying and
tanning
Utensils,
handicrafts
Construction
materials
Ornamentals
Exudates

Animals and animal products
Categories
Living animals
Honey,beeswax
Bushmeat

Description
Mainly vertebrates such as mammals,
birds, reptiles etc.
Products provided by bees.
Meat provided by vertebrates, mainly
mammals

Other edible
Mainly edible in vertebrates such as
animal products insects (e.g. caterpillars), crabs and other
“secondary” products of animals (e.g.
eggs, nests)
Plant material (mainly barkand leaves) proHides, skins
Hide and skin of animals used for various
viding tannins and other plant parts (especially
purposes
leaves and fruits) used as colorants
Heterogeneous group of products including
Medicine
Entire animals or parts of animals such
thatch, bamboo, rattan, wrapping leaves, fibres
as various organs used for medicinal
(e.g. Arouma, Bwa Flo, Silk cotton floss, Screw
purposes (e.g. caterpillars, crab legs,
pine)
snake oil)
thatch, bamboo, fibres,
Entire plants (e.g. orchids, ferns, philodendron) Colorants
Entire animals or parts of animals such
andparts of the plants (e.g. potsmade from
as various organs used as colorants
roots) used forornamental purposes
Substances such as gums(water soluble),
Other nonedible e.g. bones used as tools
resins (water insoluble) and latex (milky or
animal products
clear juice), released from plants by exudation

Source: Adapted from FAO 1995; Shiva and Verma 2002

4. IMPACT OF NTFPS EXTRACTION
ON FOREST RESOURCES
It is often assumed that NTFPs are
sustainably harvested and that this “green social security” will always be available to resource users. This is not always the case. The
early interest in NTFPs was encouraged by t
he belief that NTFP commercialisation that
added sufficient value to forest products could
contribute to forest conservation (Nepstad and
Schwartzman 1992). Where NTFPs are harvested in a sustainable manner, this may indeed
be the case (Sunderland et al. 2004; Belcher and
Schreckenberg 2007). Several scientists have
stressed that NTFPs can be harvested without
much destruction of the forest, while maintaining essential environmental functions and preserving biological diversity (Anderson 1990;
Plotkin and Famolare 1992; Peters 1996). The
extraction of NTFPs is considered sustainable
if it has no long-term deleterious effect on the
regeneration of the harvested population, and
when the yield remains more or less constant
throughout the years (Cunningham 2000). Nevertheless, uncontrolled extraction due to population increases, high demand for NTFPs and

low prices has caused species extinction and
forest degradation in many countries (Browder
1992; Ahenkan and Boon 2010). Unsustainable
harvesting of NTFPs does have a number of
ecological impacts, including a gradual reduction in the vigour of harvested plants, animals,
as well as decreasing rates of seedling establishment of harvested species, potential disruption of local animal populations and nutrient
loss from harvested material (Peters 1996).
There was ample evidence of over-harvesting
even at the time that NTFP exploitation was
promoted as nature conservation strategies according to Sunderland et al. (2004).
5. THE NEED FOR NTFPS FARMING
In many parts of the world, local people are
losing access to valued plant and animal species either through overexploitation and habitat destruction or loss of access as former harvesting areas are included within national parks
or forest reserves. Achieving sustainable NTFPs
harvest and forest conservation relies entirely
on the ability to reconcile ecosystem productivity with human exploitation (Marshall et al.
2005). Higher demand increases pressure on the

7

NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS

resource and as resources become depleted, three
main strategies are employed to militate against
shortfalls in supply: travel further to find the
product, substituting the particular product with
a similar product or to develop a more intensive
or cultivated sources of supply (Cunningham
2000; Ahenkan and Boon 2010). As a result of
the recognition that the extraction of NTFPs
from natural forests has limited potential for
improving household economies, several scholars began to question whether the objective of
enhancing forest-based livelihoods through
NTFPs could not be better fulfilled by optimising
NTFPs production through domestication
(Kusters et al. 2001; Arnold and Ruiz Pérez
2001; De Jong 2002). Ros Tonen (1999) and
Ahenkan and Boon (2008) state that it is incorrect to suggest that NTFPs can be harvested indefinitely without proper management practices
and domestication to sustain their yield and
therefore call for the need for intensification of
management and semi-domestication of these
products of forest origin, including honey, mushrooms, snails, grass-cutters, medicinal and aromatic plants and fruits. The contribution of
NTFPs to improving livelihoods can best be assured through a process of gradual domestication of NTFPs in human-modified (agro) forest
types. Rajesh Rajchal (2006) notes that intensified management and domestication of NTFPs
may be an important means of improving livelihood of poor through higher yields, improved
and more consistent quality and control over the
timing of harvests and reduce pressure on wild
and presumably endangered resources. The
study by De Jong (2000) of forest products and
local forest management in three Bidayuh villages in West Kalimantan also confirms the coexistence of several NTFP exploitation systems
involving various types of managed natural forests and domestication types.
6. CONCLUSION
From the discourse above, it is clear that the
term “NTFPs” has proved difficult to define in
a universally acceptable way. The definition and
scope of the concept still remain a major challenge to research on and the development, and
promotion of NTFPs. Conflicting interests and
objectives have also subjected the terminology
and usage of the term to a lot of ambiguity and
inconsistencies. Nevertheless, the original con-

servation/development proposition in the NTFP
debate since its inception has been subjected to
various discussions and revisions. Consequently,
the concept is gradually evolving from a resource focus only on natural forests to include
cultivation of products of forest origin. Most of
the products that are being marketed as NTFPs
originate both from natural forests, managed
vegetations and domestication. In practice, the
distinction between ‘wild’, semi or cultivated
products will continue to be difficult. The transitions are so gradual and the products remain
the same at the market level and therefore the
terminology is unnecessary. NTFPs cannot be
harvested indefinitely without proper management and domestication practices to sustain their
yield. The products are being depleted at an
alarming rate and forest dependent communities continue to lose them, either through overexploitation or habitat destruction. Since the
objective of NTFPs is to improve livelihoods and
conservation of forest resources, these resources
can best be assured through a process of gradual
domestication in human-modified systems. Unless urgent measures are taken to reverse the
current trend of harvesting NTFPs from the wild,
most of these products will disappear before they
are documented and the term NTFPs will eventually be a myth. However, there is the need for
sub-division of the NTFPs continuum into natural, managed, and cultivated in order to enhance
their research development, and promotion.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Our heartfelt gratitude goes to the Vlaamse
Interuniversesitaire Raad (VLIR) for supporting the PhD of Mr. Albert Ahenkan at Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgium. We also sincerely thank Prof. Kwame Ameyaw Domfeh for
reviewing this article. We thank staff of the International Centre for Enterprise and Sustainable Development (ICED), Accra, for assisting
us during the literature review and data collection.
REFERENCES
Ahenkan A, Boon E 2010. Commercialization of non-timber
forest products in Ghana: Processing, packaging and
marketing. Food Agric and Env, 8: 962-969.
Ahenkan A, Boon E 2008. Enhancing food security, poverty
reduction and sustainable forest management in Ghana
through Non-Timber Forest Products farming: Case
study of Sefwi Wiawso District, published online by

8
GRIN Publishing at www.grin.com/de/preview/.html
(Retrieved August, 8, 2010)
Anderson AB 1990. Extraction and forest management by
rural inhabitants in the Amazon estuary, In: AB
Anderson (Ed.): Alternatives to Deforestation: Steps
Towards Sustainable Use of the Amazon Rain Forest.
New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 65-85.
Arnold JEM, Ruiz Perez M 1998. The role of non-timber
forest products in conservation and development. In: E
Wollenberg, A Ingles (Eds.): Incomes from the Forest:
Methods for the Development and Conservation of
Forest Products for Local Communities. Bogor,
Indonesia: CIFOR / IUCN, pp. 17–42.
Arnold JEM, Ruiz Pérez M 2001. Can non-timber forest
products match tropical conservation and development
objectives? Ecol Econs, 39: 437-447.
Andel TR van 2000. Non-timber Forest Products of the
North-West District of Guyana Part II, A Field Guide.
Tropenbos-Guyana Series 8. pp. 12-81
Belcher B, Ruiz-Pérez M 2001. An international comparison
of cases of forest product development: overview,
description and data requirements. Center for
International Forestry Research (CIFOR) Working
Paper 23. Bogor, Indonesia: CIFOR.
Belcher BM 2003. What isn’t a NTFP? International
Forestry Review, 2: 161–168.
Belcher B, Ruiz Pérez M, Achdiawan R 2005. Global patterns
and trends in the use and management of commercial
NTFPs: Implications for livelihoods and conservation.
World Development, 9: 1435–1452.
Belcher B, Schreckenberg K 2007. Commercialisation of nontimber forest products: A reality check. Development
Policy Review, 3: 355-377.
Bih F 2008. Assessment Methods for Non-Timber Forest
Products in Off-Reserve Forests. Case Study of Goaso
District, Ghana. PhD Thesis. Freiburg, Germany: der
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität.
Browder J O 1992. Social and economic constraints on the
development of market-oriented extractive reserves in
Amazon rain forests. Advances in Econ Botany, 9: 3341.
Centre for Non-Timber Resources (CNTR) 2006. A future
beneath the trees. An International Symposium on NonTimber Forest Products, Community Economic
Development and Forest Conservation, Royal Roads
University, Victoria, BC, pp. 2-12.
Chandrasekharan C 1995. Terminology, definition and
classification of forest products other than wood. In:
Report of the International Expert Consultation on
Non-Wood Forest Products. Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
17-27 January 1995. Non-wood forest products No.
3. Rome: FAO, pp. 345-380.
Charlie S, Sheona S 2004. The importance of Non-Timber
Forest Products in rural livelihood security and as safety
nets: A review of evidence from South Africa. South
Africa J of Science, 100: 58-664.
Choudhury PR 2007. Forest-route to poverty alleviation Myths and realities: Analysis of NTFP-livelihood
Linkages in some Indian states. A poster presented in
the RRI Conference in Bangkok, 4-7 September 2007.
Clark LE, Sunderland TCH 2004. The key Non-Timber
Forest Products of central Africa. State of the
knowledge. Technical Paper Number 122. Office of
Sustainable Development, Bureau for Africa,
Washington D.C.: USAID.
Clark LE, Asaha S, Ndam N, Blackmore P 2004. Eru
(Gnetum africanum and G. buchholzianum). In: LE
Clark , TCH Sunderland (Eds.): The Key Non-Timber
Forest Products of Central Africa: State of the
Knowledge. Technical Paper No. 122, Washington

ALBERT AHENKAN AND EMMANUEL BOON
D.C.: USAID, pp. 37-62. URL: http://pdf.dec.org/
pdf_docs/PNADA851.pd (Retrieved May 25, 2010).
Clendon K 2001.The Role of Forest Food Resources in
Village Livelihood Systems: A Study of Three Villages
in Salavan Province. Lao PDR, Vientiane: IUCN/
NAFRI Project
Coppen J 1999. Can NTFPs come from a plantation? NTFP
Biocultural Digest. IGC. Cited in Ros-Tonen MAF
1999. Refining concepts, objectives and research
questions for NTFP research. In: MAF Ros-Tonen
(Ed.): Seminar Proceedings. NTFP Research in the
Tropenbos Programme: Results and Perspectives, 28
January 1999. Wageningen: The Tropenbos Foundation.
Cunningham AB 2000. People, Wild Plant Use and
Conservation. Applied Ethno-botany. London:
Earthscan.
de Beer JH, McDermott M 1989. The Economic Value of
Non-Timber Forest Products in South- East Asia.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands Committee for IUCN
de Jong W, Campbell BM, Schroder JM 2000. Sustaining
incomes from non- timber forest products: Introduction
and synthesis. Int Tree Crops Journal, 4: 267-275.
Dove MR 1994. A revisionist view of tropical deforestation
and development. Env Cons, 1: 17-56.
Falconer J 1997. Developing Research Frames for NonTimber Forest Products: Experience from Ghana: In:
M Ruiz Pérez, JEM Arnold (Eds.): Current Issues in
Non-timber Forest Products Research. Bogor,
Indonesia: Centre for International Forestry Research,
pp. 143-160.
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations
(FAO). 1995. Non Wood Forest Products for Rural
Income and Sustainable Forestry. Rome: FAO NWFPs
7.
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) 1999. An
Overview of Non Timber Forest Products in the
Mediterranean Region. Rome: FAO, pp. 1-9.
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) 1999. FAO
Forestry – Towards a Harmonised Definition of NonWood Forest Products. Unasylva– No. 198, Vol. 50.
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) 2001. Trees
Outside Forests - Towards Rural and Urban
Integrated Resources Management Contribution to
the Forest Resources Assessment 2000 Report. Rome:
FAO.
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 2006. Can NonWood Forest Products Help Contribute to Achieving
The Millennium Development Goals? Rome: FAO, pp.
2-14.
Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) 2008. An
Information Bulletin on Non-Wood Forest Products.
Non-Wood News, FAO, Vol 17, Rome, pp. 12-21.
Golam R, Madhav K, Ram PS 2008.The role of non-timber
forest products in poverty reduction in India: Prospects
and problems. Development in Practice, 6: 779 – 788.
Hammen MC, van der Rodríguez CA 1996. Manipulation
of forest succession by the Yukuna and Matapí Indians
of the Colombian Amazon. Tropenbos Newsletter, 12:
2-4.
Homma AKO 1992. The dynamics of extraction in Amazonia:
A historical perspective. Adv in Econ Botany, 9: 2331.
Jean-Laurent P, Patrick R 2002. Non- Timber Forest
Products: In: P Jean-Laurent, R Patrick (Eds): Between
Poverty Alleviation and Market Forces. Bern,
Switizerland: Trees and Forests in Development
Cooperation, pp. 4-36.
Kaimowitz D, Scherr SJ, White A 2004. A New Agenda for
Forest Conservation and Poverty Reduction: Making

NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS
Markets Work for Low Income Producers. Washington,
D.C.: Forest Trends.
Marshall E, Schreckenberg K, Newton A 2003. Commercialization of non-timber forest products: First steps in
analyzing the factors influencing success. Int Fores Rev,
2: 128-137.
Marshall E, Newton AC, Schreckenberg K 2005. Commercialization of Non-Timber Forest Products: First Steps
in Analysing the Factors Influencing Success, Int Fores
Rev, 5: 128-135
Mathur RB, Shiva MP 1996. Standard NTFP classification
and documentation manual. Dehra Dun: Khanna
Bandhu, pp. 1-40.
Mbuvi D, Boon E 2008. The livelihood potential of nonwood forest products: The case of Mbooni Division in
Makueni District, Kenya, Envi Dev Sust, 11: 989–1004.
Morris J, Bay A (Eds.) 2002. An overview of the NTFP Subsector in Vietnam. Forest Science Institute of Vietnam.
Vietnam: NTFP Research Centre, pp. 4-12.
Myers N 1988. Tropical forests: Much more than stocks of
wood. J Trop Ecol, 4: 209–221.
Ndoye O, Ruiz Pérez M, Eyebe A 1998. The markets of nontimber forest products in the humid forest zone of
Cameroon. Overseas Development Institute, London:
ODI Rural Development. Forestry Network Paper No.
22c.
Nepstad DC, Schwartzman S 1992. Non-timber products
from tropical forests: evaluation of a conservation and
development strategy. Advances in Economic Botany,
9: vii–xii.
Neumann R P, Hirsch E 2000. Commercialization of NonTimber Forest Products:Review and Analysis of
Research. Bogor: Center for International Forestry
Research and Rome: FAO.
Peters CM 1996. The ecology and management of non-timber
forests resources. World Bank Technical Paper Number
322. Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Peters CM, Gentry AH, Mendelsohn RO 1989. Valuation of
an Amazonian. Forest Nature, 339: 655-656
Plotkin M, Famolare L (Eds.) 1992. Sustainable Harvest
and Marketing of Rain Forest Products. Washington
D.C.: Conservation International. Island Press.
Posey D 1982. The keepers of the forest. Garden, 6: 18–24.
Rajesh R 2006. Analytical Review of the Definitions of Non
Timber Forest Product. http://www.forestrynepal.org/
article/rrajchal/456 (Retrieved May 25, 2010)
Ros-Tonen MAF, Lammerts B EM, Dijkman W 1995.
Commercial and Sustainable Extraction of NonTimber Forest Products. Towards a Policy and Management Oriented Research Strategy. Wageningen, the
Netherlands: The Tropenbos Foundation.
Ros-Tonen MAF, Andel T, Assies W, Dijk JFW, Duivenvoorden JF, Hammen MC, Jong W, Reinders M,
Rodríguez Fernández CA, Valkenburg JLC 1998.
Methods for Non-Timber Forest Products research.
The Tropenbos Experience. Wageningen, The Netherlands: Tropenbos Documents 14.
Ros-Tonen MAF 1999. Refining concepts, objectives and
research questions for NTFP research. In: MAF RosTonen (Ed.): Seminar Proceedings. NTFP Research
in the Tropenbos Pro-gramme: Results And Perspectives. Wageningen: The Tropenbos Foundation.
Ros-Tonen MAF 2000. The role of non-timber forest products
in sustainable tropical forest management. Europe J
Wood and Wood Products, 3: 196-201
Ros-Tonen MAF, Wiersum FK 2003. The Importance
of Non-Timber Forest Products for Forest Based
Rural Livelihoods: An Evolving Research Agenda.
Amsterdam Research Institute for Global Issues and

9
Development Studies (AGIDS), The Netherlands,
University of Amsterdam.
Ros-Tonen MAF, Wiersum K F 2005. The scope of improving
rural livelihoods through Non-Timber Forest Products:
An evolving research agenda. Forests, Trees and
Livelihoods, 15(2):129-148.
Ruiz Perez M, Byron N (Eds.) 1999. A methodology to
analyse divergent case studies of Non-Timber Forest
Products and their development potential. Forest
Science, 45(1): 1–14.
Saxena NC 2003. Livelihood Diversification and NonTimber Forest Products in Orissa: Wider Lessons on
the Scope for Policy Change? ODI Working Paper No.
223. London, UK: Overseas Development Institute.
Senanayake 1999. Can NTFPs come from a Plantation?
NTFPs Biocultural Digest. IGC.
Shackleton CM, Shackleton SE 2004. The importance of nontimber forest products in rural livelihood security and
as safety nets: A review of evidence from South Africa.
South African J Science, 100: 658-664.
Sheil D, Wunder S 2002. The Value of Tropical Forest to
Local Communities: Complications, Caveats and
Cautions. Cons Ecology. 2: 1-9.
Schreckenberg K, Awono A, Degrande A, Mbosso C, Ndoye
O, Tchoundjeu Z 2006. What do non-timber products
mean for forest conservation? IUCN Bulletin, 3: 1315.
Shiva MP, Verma SK 2002. Approaches to Sustainable
Forest Management and Biodiversity Conservation:
With Pivotal Role of Non-timber Forest Products.
Dehra Dun: Centre for Minor Forest Products, Valley
Offset Printers.
Subedi BP 2006. Linking Plant-based Enterprises and Local
Communities to Bio-diversity Conservation in Nepal
Himalaya. New Delhi: Adroit Publishers.
Sunderland T, Ndoye O 2004. Forest Products, Livelihoods
and Conservation. Case Studies of Non-Timber Forest
Products Systems. Vol. 2 - Africa. Bogor: CIFOR, pp.
1-55.
Sunderland TCH, Harrison ST, Ndoye O 2004. Commercialisation of non-timber forest products in Africa:
history, context and prospects. In: T Sunderland, O
Ndoye (Eds.): Forest Products, Livelihoods and
Conservation: Case Studies of Non-Timber Forest
Product Systems. Volume 2: Africa. Bogor: CIFOR,
pp. 1-24.
Tropenbos 1999. NTFP Research in the Tropenbos Programme: Results and Perspectives. Wageningen:
Tropenbos Foundation.
van Dijk J, Wiersum F 1999. An assessment of non-wood
forest product resources for the development of sustainable commercial extraction. In: TCH Sunderland,
LE Clark, P Vantomme (Eds.): Non-wood Forest
Products of Central Africa: Current Research Issues
and Prospects for Conservation and Management.
Rome: FAO, pp. 37-50.
Wollenberg E, Ingles A (Eds.) 1998. Incomes from the forest.
Methods for the development and conservation of forest
products for local communities. CIFOR: IUCN.
Wong Jenny LG 2000. The biometrics of Non-Timber Forest
Product resource assessment: A review of current
methodology. Report commissioned under the ZF0077
pre-project of the Forest Research Programme of the
United Kingdom Department for International
Development. www.etfrn.org/etfrn/workshop/ntfp/
download.html (Accessed June 2010)
Wunder S, Angelsen A 2003. Exploring the forest-poverty
link: Key concepts, issues and research implications.
CIFOR Occasional Paper No. 40.

