WFL Publisher
Science and Technology

Meri-Rastilantie 3 B, FI-00980 Helsinki, Finland
e-mail: info@world-food.net



Journal of Food, Agriculture & Environment Vol.8 (2): 962-969. 2010



www.world-food.net


Commercialization of non-timber forest products in Ghana: Processing, packaging and marketing
Albert Ahenkan and Emanuel Boon
Human Ecology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 103, B1090 Jette, Brussels, Belgium. e-mail: aahenkan@vub.ac.be, Albert.Ahenkan@vub.ac.be

Received 17 January 2010, accepted 2 April 2010.

Abstract
The collection and marketing of Non-timber Forest Products (NTFPs) in Ghana are being promoted as a potential solution to the current high rates of malnutrition, the poor health of the rural population and the spread and intensification of poverty. Accomplishing these goals requires an understanding of how NTFPs are extracted, processed and marketed in rural areas. It is an important means for economic growth and sustainable forest management in local communities. Despite the potential of NTFPs in poverty reduction and livelihoods improvement in rural areas in Ghana, little is known about their collection, procession, packaging and labeling. This paper examines the supply chain and commercialization of NTFPs in rural settings in Ghana and their potential to contribute to poverty reduction, food security and livelihoods improvement. The study uses an exploratory and qualitative research methodology, including an extensive literature review, consultations with key informants, administration of questionnaires, interviews and stakeholder consultations. The results of the study indicated that NTFPs contribute significantly to the food security, poverty reduction and livelihoods development in Ghana. The marketing of these products, however, faces a number of critical processing, labeling and marketing challenges. The NTFPs marketing often occurs in an informal way, resulting in uncertainty about prices and yields. Marketing is basically done individually; it is unorganized, dispersed and farmers lack the necessary marketing skills and information required for optimal performance. Promoting the development and commercialization of these products on a permanent basis will enormously help to create more sustainable employment and income-generation opportunities, enhance food security and improve the livelihoods of farmers, their families and communities. The paper also identifies and analyses a number of critical factors that hinder the commercialization of NTFPs in Ghana and recommends strategies for redressing them.

Key words: Commercialization, food security, livelihood improvement, labeling, marketing, nutrition, non-timber forest products, packaging, poverty reduction, processing.





Introduction
Commercialization of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) is being recognized by conservation and development organisations as a potential source of income for rural poor 1-8. The collection and marketing of NTFPs are being promoted as a potential solution to the current high rates of malnutrition and the poor health of rural population and the spread and intensification of poverty 2, 9-10. They play important role in meeting the needs of rural communities for food, poverty reduction and sustainable management of forest resources and livelihoods improvement 1,2, 11, 12. Worldwide, it is estimated that 350 million people depends on forests as their primary source of income, food, nutrition and medicine 14. It is a traditional source of household income and sustenance in rural areas around the world.
 In many parts of Ghana, these resources are critical, especially for the rural poor, particularly the women 15, 16. The commercialization of NTFPs can provide an important means for poverty reduction, food security, nutrition and sustainable forest management in local communities 1, 8, 17, 18. FAO 19 estimated that 80% of the population of the developing world use NTFPs to meet some of their health and nutritional needs. For the purposes of this paper, NTFPs is defined as "biological resources of plant



and animal origin, harvested from natural forests, manmade plantations, wooded land, farmlands, trees outside forests and/ or domesticated 1, 2, 20-24.
 Unlike timber marketing which is extensively discussed in forestry literature, the knowledge of NTFP marketing is limited and sparse 2, particularly in the developing countries where collectors are mainly low-income earners who sell these products to supplement their income are not reported 25, 26. The emphasis on global markets NTFPs often overshadows the importance of local trade of NTFPs in developing countries. NTFPs continue to play an important role in meeting the needs of rural communities for food, income, poverty reduction and livelihood improvement. In Ghana, it is estimated that 20-25 percent of the economically active population derives income from NTFPs 2, 16.
 Despite this potential role of NTFPs, little is known about their collection, procession, utilization, packaging and labeling requirements in Ghana and in international market. Their economic, social and environmental contribution remains largely undervalued and understudied. This is partly due to lack of accurate and comprehensive data on NTFPs and their value chain in Ghana. Consequently, it is difficult to estimate the true economic, social

and environmental importance of NTFPs in poverty reduction, livelihood improvement and sustainable forest management. Marketing is basically done individually, unorganized, dispersed and lacks the necessary marketing skills and information to gain leverage in the market. This paper examines the commercialization and marketing of NTFPs, especially food products (honey, mushrooms, snails and grass-cutters) in rural communities in Ghana and their potential to contribute to poverty reduction and livelihoods improvement amongst forest dependent communities in Ghana. The paper also identifies and analyses a number of critical factors that hinder the commercialization of NTFPs in the country.

Conceptual framework: The conceptual framework on which this paper is anchored is the role of commercialization of NTFPs in food security, nutrition, health and poverty reduction. The principal premise of the paper is that processing, packaging and marketing of NTFPs play an important role in meeting the needs of rural communities for food, poverty reduction and livelihood improvement 1. The rationale for NTFP commercialization is often to improve the livelihoods of poor people, especially NTFP producers. By creating and capturing more value, it is hoped that poor people will gain from improved income and employment opportunities 27. The conceptual framework of commercialization of NTFPs in Ghana is illustrated in Fig. 1.
  As illustrated by the framework, NTFPs commercialization involved a complex process from the farming or wild harvesting, processing, packaging, labeling, transportation and marketing of the product to final consumers. Marketing channels for NTFPs

are diverse and in some cases, complex 1. A clear understanding of the commodity chain for specific NTFPs is important if we are to understand where interventions to benefit harvesters would be most successful and productive. The relationship between NTFP producers and the markets they supply range from direct sales to consumers to a complex network of middlemen and retailers. At present, the market and trade channels of most of the NTFPs in Ghana follow a general pattern. This involves either harvesting from the wild or domesticated products and sold through local market channels and/or retailers in both local and urban centres to the final consumers.

Value chains of NTFPs: The paper also applies the value chain framework which is a business oriented approach (adapted from Marshall et al. 1) that aims at making use of the best values of all stages of production, processing and marketing. The better the farmers, traders, processors, retailers and consumers cooperate, the higher will be the value generated for the individual actor at every stage of the value chain.
 The value chain describes the full range of activities which are required to bring a product or service from conception, through the different phases of production (involving a combination of physical transformation and the input of various producer services), delivery to final consumers and final disposal after use 1, 28.
 The generic structure of the NTFPs value chain 1 is common to NTFPs commercialization in Ghana. The value chain contains the following activities: production, collection, processing, packaging/ labeling, transport, marketing and consumption (Fig. 2).



























Figure 1. Conceptual framework for commercialization of NTFPs in Ghana.

Commercialization of NTFPs: NTFP commercialization is defined as a process of increasing the value of NTFP in trade so as to increase income and employment opportunities, especially for poor and otherwise disadvantaged people 27. This expectation is based on the well- documented importance of many NTFPs in rural livelihoods 1, 29. To understand the implications of promoting NTFP commercialization, it is essential to understand what and who are involved in the 'production-to-consumption system' 30 or the 'value chain'. Defined as a complex web of companies and other actors that affect the production-to-consumption process 31, the term 'value chain' highlights the value that is realized in the process and how it is communicated 32. It is synonymous with terms such as 'supply chain', or 'market chain' used by Neumann and Hirsch 5 in their review of NTFP commercialization. According to Marshall et al.1, the most constraining processes of NTFP commercialization are the value chain activities of NTFP marketing and sales which are also the major bottleneck for many NTFPs farmers in rural Ghana. The important challenges and major bottleneck of NTFP commercialization in forest dependent communities are the value chain activities of NTFPs marketing and sales. Marketing activities and strategies result in






Figure 2. Value chains of NTFPs.

making products available that satisfy customers while making profits. The commercial functions involved in transferring goods from producer to consumer, 'marketing', is also a value chain activity. Kotler et al. 36 defined marketing as 'identifying and meeting human, social and organizational needs in a profitable way', and these 'needs' as 'individual or social needs for which one is willing to pay and which can be converted into profitable business opportunities'. Marketing activities are numerous and varied because they basically include everything needed to get a product from the farm into the hands of the final customer. Due to the fact that a wide variety of products and NTFP markets are prevalent, a generic approach towards the marketing of NTFPs does not exist. Some products need to be marketed with consumer marketing methods, while others require industrial marketing approaches.

Materials and Methods
The Bibiani-Bekwai and Sefwi Wiawso Districts shown in Fig. 3 were selected for the study. These two districts were selected because they constitute a major area for NTFPs in Ghana and have common natural, social and economic characteristics that indicate high forest dependence.
In addition to a comprehensive literature review on the topic,

both primary and secondary data were collected and analysed. This field investigation was designed as an exploratory and qualitative research because little organised information of NTFPs existed in the study areas. Several previous studies on NTFPs which utilised exploratory and
qualitative designs 2, 23, 25, 35, 38 provide inspiration for modeling the present investigation. A field survey in the Sefwi Wiawso and Bibiani-Bekwai Districts was conducted between January and July 2009. Four main participatory research methods were used in conducting the field research. Key informant interviews 37, administration of questionnaires, participants' observations 38 and stakeholder consultations were used to solicit views on various facets of the production processing, packaging and marketing chain of NTFPs in Ghana. Primary data was collected through direct in-person interviews with various market players who are defined as individuals or institutions that have a role in the marketing chain and include collectors, dealers, producers, and sellers of NTFPs. A total of 200 NTFPs producers in the two districts were selected through purposeful sampling, while 40 sellers were selected through the snowball sampling technique 36. These product categories (grass-cutters, mushrooms, snails and medicinal plants) were chosen because of their expected importance in the NTFPs trade in the two study areas. Two non- probability sampling methods were utilised: purposeful, where samples are selected out of the population for having certain characteristics such as ease of access and representability 25, 35 and snowball, where respondents are found as a reference from other respondents. To ensure a broad based and objective data




Figure 3. Map of Ghana showing the Western region of Ghana and the study area 34.

collection, a carefully designed open-ended questionnaire was also administered to key informants knowledgeable in the collection, processing and marketing of NTFPs in the districts. The data collected through administration of questionnaires, interviews and stakeholder consultations were analysed both quantitatively and qualitatively. The quantitative analysis was done using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) and Microsoft Excel.

Results and Discussion


50.0
45.0
40.0
35.0
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0



4444,.44




39.8


NTFP activity



2288.,66	2299,.33













22.,33













00,.00

A total of 120 farmers/collectors of NTFPs in the Sefwi Wiawso

Beekeeping Grass-cutter
rearing

Mushroom cultivation

Snail rearing

Medicinal plants

Others

and Bibiani-Bekwai Districts participated in this survey (Table 1), comprising of 40% and 60% females. The age distribution of the respondents ranged between 18 and over 65 years. About 64% of the respondents were in the age group of 31-50 and the economically active group was also found within this age group. Age group 18-30 accounts for 23.3% of the respondents, 51-65 years formed 11.3% of the respondent whilst only 1.5% were aged above 65 years. Out of the 120 respondents, 78.2% were married, 12.8% single, 5.5% divorced and 3.5% widowed.
 The high number of respondents in a marital relationship is due to the cultural reasons and the need for some form of security for the family in the event of economic or social crisis. A significant number of the respondents have family size between 5 and 7 people.

Farming activities of respondents: Besides cultivation of traditional crops, NTFP farming is often considered as an additional farming activity. Respondents ranked farming activities according to their importance to them. About 61% indicated cocoa as their major farming activity; 12.5% maize; 11.1% cassava; 10.3% tree farming and 5.5 oil palm production.

NTFP farming in the districts: While cocoa and other farming activities are important in the study area, farmers have a great variety of occupations and income-earning strategies to supplement income from traditional farming activities. Farmers engage in the collection and production of NTFPs such as honey production/beekeeping, grass-cutter rearing, mushrooms, snails, medicinal plants to supplement their incomes. The field survey conducted on farmers of these products indicated that most of the respondents were active in beekeeping followed by grass- cutter, snail rearing, mushroom and medicinal plants, respectively, to supplement their incomes (Fig. 4).
 The respondents chose to farm NTFPs for various reasons. About 65.2% indicated they farm NTFPs to supplement their income; 11.5% farm these products due to poor cocoa harvests, 9.7% do so due to lack of alternative economic activities; whilst 6.2% cited conservation of forest as the motivation for producing NTFPs.

Figure 4. Distribution of NTFPs activities (percent).

 Furthermore, 7.0% and 3.2% indicated that they, respectively, engage in the production of these products to improve the food security of their families and for conservation purposes. Finally, 1.4% of respondents also farm the NTFPs due to the non- availability or small size of farmlands. NTFP-related activities are important elements of livelihood strategies amongst farmers in the study area. Among the 100 households sampled, 85% derive some income from the farming/gathering of NTFPs to supplement their incomes. About 32 % have more than half of their total income on NTFPs (Table 2).

Commercialization of NTFPs in Ghana:
Honey production, processing and packaging: Honey production in Ghana has been enhanced through the use of improved beehive technology such as the Kenyan top bar. The study revealed that honey harvesting is mostly in the night and requires harvesting accessories. About 85% of the farmers/harvesters use smokers, protective clothes (bee suit, gloves, veil, and boots), containers, and hive tools while 15.0% use other harvesting accessories such as fire and knife, especially at night. The production period of honey in Ghana is between the months of December and April. Actors in the honey value chain in Ghana involve producers, processors, wholesalers, retailers and consumers. The value chain is not fully operational. Most of the honey is sold in raw form, with little or no processing and packaging. Ninety percent (90%) of the respondents usually sell honey in bottles without labeling while about 10% sell with labeling. Some retailers and farmers do some form of packaging and labeling where the honey is put in plastic bottles with some labels and sold to the consumers. The quality of honey produced in Ghana depends largely on the mode of harvests. A significant number of beekeepers employ crude harvesting methods that involve the use of fire and smoke. This does not only kill the bees but introduces soot and impurities like dead bees as well as other insects and foreign material into the honey. Wild honey is especially always exposed to lots of smoke


Table 1. Social characteristics of respondents.

Age%Marital
Status%Family Size%Education%18-30 years23.3Married78.2Less than 5 people39.1No School16.631-50 years63.9Single12.85-7 people40.6Primary57.951-65 years11.3Divorced5.58-12 people18.0Senior Sec. Sch.18,8> 65 years1.5Widowed3.513-15 people0.8Tertiary6.0>15 people1.5Postgraduate0.7Total100Total100Total100Total100Field Survey, 2009
Table 2. Annual income and share of NTFP-based income among respondents.	of economic importance that are reared or picked

Income Quintile
of Respondents%Avg. Annual
IncomeNTFP-based income as
share offrom the forest in Ghana include West Africa
giant snails, Archachatina marginata and	GH˘	total income		Achatina achatina. Until recently, snails
1 "rich"5.05,000-6,00025%241.03,000-4,90028%323.02,000-3,00045%416.01,500-2,00051%5 "poor"	15.0	650-1,000	55%	
"1" represents the upper (high-income) quintile and "5" the lower (low-income) quintile. 1 US$ = 1.5 GH˘

during harvest and processing. Consequently, low quality has resulted in low patronage and low prices for locally produced honey. The unit of measurement for sale of honey is a standard bottle (750 ml) which weighs about 1kg. Though, honey production is currently sold at the local and national levels, great potentials exist for the development of a viable honey export system in Ghana.

occurred mostly in the wild where they were gathered during the rainy season for consumption and for the open market. However, the rapid growth of human population with its consequent effects on intensive land clearing for expanded agriculture, tree felling for timber,



Grass-cutter processing and packaging: Flaming and scalding are the two traditional methods used to process grass-cutters in Ghana. Flaming is a process where the grass-cutters are individually placed on burning fire wood for the removal of the fur while scalding is a process in which the grass-cutter is dipped into hot water of about 80-100°C and knife used to remove the fur. The study revealed that most farmers (67%) prefer the flaming method which they claimed it gives a better flavour of the meat when the fur of the animal is flamed due to increased fat solubilization at higher temperatures and also easier as compare to scalding, 33% scalding due to colour and neatness of the final product. Others smoke the grass-cutter using a smoke house, where the meat is hung around a glowing burner and allowed to gradually dry out on its own.
 Most farmers interviewed (75%) sell grass-cutters in its raw form to customers at either the farm gate or local market. However, in some cases, farmers process the meat before selling at the most popular spots on the highway. The price of processed grass- cutter is more than the unprocessed one. For instance, in Sefwi Wiawso District it was realized on the average, the price of semi- processed grass-cutter costs GH˘ 45.00, while the unprocessed one cost GH˘ 30.00. It was also realized that farmers were aware of the potential international market for grass-cutters but the problem is lack of processing and packaging skills and facilities.

Mushroom processing and packaging in Ghana: Mushroom is an important food in the diet of Ghanaians. The wild mushrooms are seasonal. They are very common and harvested between the months of February and March. Most farmers who, however, want to stay in business all-year round to supplement their incomes produce the popular oyster mushrooms which grow in composted bags of sawdust prepared by famers. It takes approximately 10 weeks to cultivate many types of mushroom spores into a product to sell to the consumers and wholesalers. The wavy-leaf-shaped mushrooms thrive in tropical climates and contain about 10% protein. Mushrooms are processed either fresh or bagged in plastic bags for sale or dried before selling. In some cases, the wild mushrooms are sold in bunch of 6-10 or 1kg for GH˘ 5.00, depending on quality and the location of the seller.

Processing and packaging of snails in Ghana: Generally, many species of edible land snails are recognized but the popular species





Figure 4. Marketing of grass-cutters in rural Ghana.

Figure 5. Harvesting and processing of mushrooms in the study area.

bush burning and excessive use of agro-chemicals, have resulted in the rapid deterioration of the forest that serves as the natural habitat of the snail. This has led to decreasing number of snails in the wild, threatening the very existence of the snail species. Snails are now reared under extensive, semi-extensive and intensive systems, depending on the location. It is a delicacy in Ghana and the situation has created a new goldmine of economic activity that is attracting a large proportion of people into snail farming. Snail farmers always make huge profits during the off-season (November-May) because in average about four snails in size which weigh between 100-150 g can make profits of up to GH˘
5.00 in the local market. Consultations with experts revealed that presently, the consumption level of snails in Ghana is over 15,000 tons. However, not even a quarter is produced in the country; about 13,000 tons come from the neighbouring country, Cote d'Ivoire.
 The running cost of snail farming is cheaper than in other forms of NTFPs farming. Some construction materials for snail trench pens such as bricks and wood are locally available in most rural areas, reducing the initial cost of establishing a snail farming venture, especially in the rural areas. Most feed materials are obtainable from local farms, thereby reducing the running cost of snail farming. These factors combine to minimise input cost and increase profit margins in the snail farming business. Snails are usually sold in bunch of 5-10 to customers either raw, smoked or dried. The study shows that most customers prefer to buy the raw

snails than the traditionally smoked and dried ones due to lack of hygienically controlled processing procedures, poor handling procedures and storage facilities. There is the need for improving smoked-dry snail processing in Ghana, including quality checks to prevent recontamination and improve shelf-life. Snail meat is high in protein (37-51%) compared to that of other domestic animals such as poultry (18.3%), cattle (17.5%), sheep (16.4%) and swine (14.5%). Moreover, snail meat has high iron content (45-59 mg/ kg), is low in fat (0.05-0.08%) and contains almost all the amino acids needed for human nutrition.

Labeling and certification of NTFPs: While discussions on NTFPs certification have increased recently, the applicability and its impact as a tool to promote the development of NTFPs remains unclear. Certification is defined by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO, 1996) as a procedure by which written assurance is given that a product, process or service is in conformity with certain standards. Although different definitions and categories exist, the main types of certification schemes distinguish between first, second and third party certification as well as between system-based and performance-based certification 39. Standards for labeling and certification of NTFPs in Ghana are not well developed. The compliance with quality criteria is one of the challenges in the marketing stage of NTFPs value chains in Ghana. The quality aspects, particularly food products, are taken care by the Ghana Standard Board and Food and Drugs Board. Unfortunately, most of the producers are not organized, isolated and sell these products locally to individual customers without meeting the required international standards. Access to international market for NTFPs is also very minimal. Although the potential for international market for some products exists in Ghana, farmers have very limited capacity in meeting international standards. Lack of standardization is a significant constraint of NTFPs commercialization in Ghana markets. Also, quantities of products produced are insufficient and failed to meet international standards for export. Eighty-seven percent (87%) of the respondents have no idea about packaging and labeling requirements of NTFPs. Trade in certified NTFPs is still marginal, compared to the trade of non-certified products. Major challenges of NTFPs labeling and certification in Ghana include lack of market demand, high costs of certification system, insufficient product definition and classification system since many NTFPs are not included in international classification or standardization systems.

Marketing of NTFPs in Ghana: Falconer 15 noted that there is a strong market for NTFPs, especially in urban centres and there are no signs of any decline. Marketing of NTFPs in Ghana involves a great number of people selling a vast array of products, including mushroom, snails, bushmeat, honey, leaves, medicinal plants, food wrapping leaves and chewing sticks, etc. The key players in NTFPs market consist of various levels of local collectors, village traders, road-head traders and large traders in the districts. Most NTFPs traders rely on district and urban markets while others bypass markets altogether and sell their products directly to local restaurants and consumers in the district capitals. For the purposes of this paper local NTFPs markets in Ghana includes the immediate village markets, markets within neighbouring villages and local towns, roadside, junction selling points and markets in the nearest large urban centres and cities. In most cases, prosperity of a market

depends on good access and the proximity of passing traffic. Most NTFPs traders besiege approaching vehicles at the checking points to sell their products.
 Although NTFPs trade is done in both local and urban markets, they have different characteristics. Also the real benefits of the trade at the local level are unknown. The study shows that NTFPs marketing in the study area often occurs in an informal way, resulting in uncertainty about prices and yields. Marketing is basically done individually; it is unorganized, dispersed and farmers lack the necessary marketing skills and information required for the optimal performance. NTFPs market in Ghana is highly characterized by seasonality and differs in social structures (including gender influence). Gender plays an important role in the marketing of NTFPs in rural Ghana. The NTFPs trade is dominated by women. However, the sale of some wild food products such as grass-cutters and other products including rattans, bamboo, hides and skins and other wild animal products are dominated by men. The price received by the collector/ producers depends on the length of the chain, location, quality and means of transportation. Producers near towns and cities have relatively better access to markets than their rural counterparts and receive higher prices than those in the hinterlands. For instance, a gallon of honey currently ranges from GH˘ 20 to GH˘ 30, depending on the location in Ghana. The local market for honey is highly fragmented and is usually sold to individuals through price negotiations.
 Though prices of honey in the study area vary from one location to another, a gallon of honey on an average is sold at GH˘ 25.00, grasscutter GH˘ 35.00 and snails GH˘ 10.00 per bunch of 5. Means of transportation also affected marketing of NTFPs. Most people in the rural areas have difficulties in bringing their products to towns and cities for sale. It was discovered that honey, for instance, are sold at GH˘ 24.00 at Sui but only GH˘ 30.00 in Sefwi Wiawso Township. A matured grass-cutter at Akaakrom, a village near Sefwi Wiawso costs GH˘ 30.00 while the same size costs GH˘ 45.00 in Sefwi Wiawso, the district capital. Prices of NTFPs also depend to a large extent on supply and demand conditions. Due to the seasonal nature of NTFPs production, the storage of the product is important in guaranteeing the supply of the products throughout the year. During the period of production, there is an important quantity of NTFPs available at the market and prices are lower than the periods where NTFPs are dearer.
  Membership of local producers association is also critical in the marketing of NTFPs. The study revealed that members of associations and network organizations are able to negotiate for better prices than individual farmers. Local producers are in a stronger position to negotiate with middlemen when they are operating as a group. Many of the farmers are often not aware of the prevailing market prices due to lack of market information. About 70% of the surveyed NTFPs farmers are members of a farmers' association. However, there is a strong need for market information, which is one of the major constraints of NTFPs commercialization in Ghana. Most NTFPs are sold without any processing or value addition and the international marketing of NTFPs has not developed. However, trade and usage of some NTFPs have assumed a wider dimension with more medicinal products being traded in the local markets. Commonly exploited and traded NTFPs in Ghana 13, 15, 40 are presented in Table 3.

Table 3. Commonly traded NTFPs in Ghana.

Foods	 Medicine	Household goods Bush meat	Barks	Baskets
Fruits	Leaves	Mats
Honey	Fruits	Wooden trays
Mushrooms	Animal products	Grinders
Snails	Prepared tonics	Mortars
Spices	Hides	Pestles
Cola nuts	Seed	Spoons
Gums	Roots	 Chewing sticks Essential oils	Essential oils	Dyes	

NTFPs commercialization in Ghana, key challenges and strategies: A number of critical factors continue to constrain the ability of farmers to exploit the full potential of commercialization of NTFPs in Ghana. The critical factors that hinder the commercialization of NTFPs in Ghana are identified and analyzed in Table 4. For NTFPs to be pivotal to poverty reduction, sustainable forest management and human development in Ghana, a number of appropriate strategies are recommended. An effective implementation of these strategies by development policy-makers and actors will significantly facilitate the development and promotion of NTFPs farming, harvesting, processing and marketing to facilitate poverty reduction, conservation of forest resources and sustainable development in Ghana.

Conclusions
NTFPs farming activities provide an important opportunity for food security and poverty reduction, particularly for the economically marginalized and forest-dependent communities in

many developing countries. Their production, processing and marketing are very critical elements of poverty reduction and livelihood improvement strategies in rural areas in Ghana. This paper has revealed that a significant number of farmers and their households in Sefwi Wiawso and Bibiani-Bekwai Districts in the Western Region of Ghana continue to supplement their income from NTFPs farming and marketing activities. Promoting the development and commercialization of these products on a permanent basis will enormously help to create more sustainable employment and income-generation opportunities, enhance food security and improve the livelihoods of farmers, their families, and communities. The results of the study indicate that the marketing of NTFPs in Ghana faces a number of critical processing, labeling, and marketing challenges. Strategies for promoting the production, harvesting, processing and marketing NTFPs will significantly help to improve food security, poverty reduction, and livelihood improvement in Ghana.

Acknowledgements
Heartfelt gratitude goes to the Vlaamse Interuniversitaire Raad (VLIR) for supporting the PhD of Mr. Albert Ahenkan at Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgium. Sincere thanks to Prof. Kwame Ameyaw Domfeh, University of Ghana, and Prof. Dr. Luc Hens, Human Ecology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium for reviewing this paper and Mr. Eric Lartey, the Forest Service Division, Sefwi Wiawso District, and the staff of International Centre for Enterprise and Sustainable Development (ICED) for assisting during the data collection and the peer review of this paper.



Table 4. Key challenges and strategies for NTFPs commercialization in Ghana.

NoKey ChallengesRecommended Strategies1Lack of policy to guide the use,* Formulation of a Visible National NTFPs Policy.management  and  development  ofNTFPs in Ghana2Over harvesting and Deforestation* Promotion of NTFPs farming as potential to help haltdepletion and improve the livelihoods.3Inadequate	Finance	for	NTFPs* Provision of financial and training support to NTFPsfarmersFarmers.  Measures to strengthen the existing rural andagricultural development banks and encourage them toprovide low interest loans to NTFPs farmers.4Poor Harvesting and Processing Skills* Building the capacity of farmers and collectors in harvestingand processing of NTFPs.
* Provision of technical and extension services.
* Establishment of local food processing companies to processand can NTFPs.5Lack of Packaging and Labeling Requirements* Build the capacity of farmers in packaging and labeling.
* The need for well developed standards for labeling andcertification of NTFPs in Ghana.6Lack of Marketing information* Increasing access to market information to NTFPs sellers canbe	achieved	through	information	dissemination,empowerment of collectors and establishment of linkagesbetween collectors and traders.7Lack of Inputs and Farm Construction* New and more innovative and sustainable materials need toMaterialsbe developed for this purpose.
* MOFA needs to set up demonstration farms in ruralcommunities to serve as centres of excellence for educatingand training farmers.8Inadequate of Awareness Creation of* Awareness  creation  of  the  nutritional,  medicinal  andthe nutritional and Health values ofenvironmental benefits of NTFPs by the Ministries ofNTFPsAgriculture, Health and Environment will significantly helpto promote the farming of NTFPs in Ghana.
References
1Marshall, E., Newton, A. C. and Schreckenberg, K. 2005. Commercialization of non-timber forest products: First steps in analysing the factors influencing success. International Forestry Review 5(2):128-135.
2Ahenkan, A. and Boon, E. 2008. Enhancing Food Security, Poverty Reduction and Sustainable Forest Management in Ghana through Non-timber Forest Products Farming: Case Study of Sefwi Wiawso District. GRIN Publishing at www.grin.com/de/preview/.html
3Belcher, B., Ruiz Pérez, M. and Achdiawan, R. 2005. Global patterns and trends in the use and management of commercial NTFPs: Implications for livelihoods and conservation. World Development 33(9):1435-1452.
4Arnold, J. E. M. and Ruiz Pérez, M. 2001. Can non-timber forest products match tropical forest conservation and development objectives? Ecological Economics 39(3):437-447.
5Neumann, R. P. and Hirsch, E. 2000. Commercialization of Non Timber Forest Products: Review and Analysis of Research. International Centre or Forestry Research (CIFOR), Bogor, Indonesia, pp. 1-147. 6Charlie, S. and Sheona, S. 2004. The importance of non-timber forest products in rural livelihood security and as safety nets: A review of evidence from South Africa. South African Journal of Science 100:58-
664.
7Shackleton, C. M. and Shackleton, S. E. 2004. The importance of non- timber forest products in rural livelihood security and as safety nets: A review of evidence from South Africa. South African Journal of Science 100(11 & 12):658-664.
8FAO 1995. Non Wood Forest.
9Angelsen, A. and Wunder, S. 2003. Exploring the Forest-Poverty Link: Key Concepts, Issues and Research Implications. CIFOR Paper 40. Indonesia, pp. 46-58.
10Bhattarai, B., Ojha, H, Banjade, M. R. and Luintel, H. 2003. The effect of NTFP market expansion on sustainable local livelihoods - A case of Nepal. A discussion note. Forest Resources Studies and Action Team,
pp. 1-11.
11Andel, T. R van. 2000. Non-timber Forest Products of the North-West District of Guyana. Part II A Field Tropenbos-Guyana Guide. pp. 1- 281.
12Food and Agriculture Organization 2006. Can Non-Wood Forest Products Help Contribute to Achieving The Millennium Development Goals? FAO, Rome, Italy, pp. 2-14.
13Bih, F. 2006. Assessment Methods for Non-timber Forest Products in Off-reserve Forests. Case Study of Goaso district, Ghana. PhD thesis, der Albert-Ludwigs-Universität, Freiburg, Germany.
14United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 2004. The Equator Initiative. "Money Grows on Trees", Cameroon, Series 5.
15Falconer, J. 1994. Non-Timber Forest Products in Southern Ghana: A Summary Report. ODA Forestry Series No. 2. Natural Resources Institute, Chatham, pp. 1-235.
16Townson, I. M. 1995. Incomes from non timber forest products: Patterns of enterprise activity in the forest zone of southern Ghana [Mimeograph]. O.F.I., University of Oxford, U.K.
17Ros-Tonen, M. A. F. 1999. Seminar Proceedings: NTFPs Research in the Tropenbos Programme: Results and Perspectives. The Tropenbos Foundation, Wageningen, the Netherlands, pp. 1-183.
18Shiva, M. P. and Verma, S. K. 2002. Approaches to Sustainable Forest Management and Biodiversity Conservation: With Pivotal Role of Non-timber Forest Products. Centre for Minor Forest Products, Valley Offset Printers, Dehra Dun, India, 172 p.
19Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 1997. Wildlife Utilization and food security in Africa. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, 8 p.
20FAO 2008. An Information Bulletin on Non-Wood Forest Products. Non-Wood News, FAO, Rome, 17:12-21.
21Wong, J. L. G. 2000. The Biometrics of Non-timber Forest Product Resource Assessment: A Review of Current Methodology. Report

Commissioned under the ZF0077 Pre-project of the Forest Research Programme of the United Kingdom, Department for International Development. www.etfrn.org/etfrn/workshop/ntfp/download.html
22Peters, C. M. 1996. The Ecology and Management of Non-timber Forests Resources. World Bank Technical Paper Number 322. The World Bank, Washington, DC.
23Mbuvi, D. and Boon, E. 2009. The livelihood potential of non-wood forest products: The case of Mbooni Division in Makueni District, Kenya. Environ. Dev. Sustain. 11:989-1004.
24Chandrasekharan, C. 1995. Terminology, definition and classification of forest products other than Wood. Paper for the International Expert Consultation on Non-Wood Forest Products, 17-27 January, Yogyakrta, Indonesia, pp. 1-23.
25Greene, S. M., Hammett, A. L. and Kant, S. 2000. Non-timber forest products marketing systems and market players in Southwest Virginia: Crafts, medicinal, herbal and specialty wood products. Journal of Sustainable Forestry 11(3):20-37.
26Shackleton, S. E. 2006. The Significance of the Local Trade in Natural Resource Products for Livelihoods and Poverty Alleviation in South Africa. PhD thesis, Rhodes University.
27Belcher, B. and Schreckenberg, K. 2007. Commercialization of non- timber forest products: A reality check. Development Policy Review 25(3):355-377.
28Kaplinsky, R. and Morris, M. 2000. A Handbook for Value Chain Research. IDRC, Institute of Development Studies, Sussex.
29Clendon, K. 2001.The Role of Forest Food Resources in Village Livelihood Systems: A Study of Three Villages in Salavan Province. Lao PDR, IUCN, Vientiane.
30Belcher, B. 1998. A production-to-consumption systems approach: Lessons from the bamboo and rattan sectors in Asia. In Wollenberg, E. and Ingles, A. (eds). Incomes from the Forests: Methods for the Development and Conservation of Forest Products for Local Communities. CIFOR, Bogor, Indonesia, pp. 57-84.
31Blowfield, M. 2001. Value Chains, Issue Paper 2. Resource Centre for the Social Dimensions of Business Practice, London. Available at www.resource-centre.org, accessed November, 2009.
32Schreckenberg, K., Rushton, J. and te Velde, D.W. 2006. NTFP value chains: What happens between production and consumption? In Marshall, E., Schreckenberg, K. and Newton, A. C. (eds), Commercialization of Non-timber Forest Products: Factors Influencing Success. Lessons Learned from Mexico and Bolivia and Policy Implications for Decision-makers. UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre, Cambridge, pp. 97-106.
33Kotler, P. and Keller, K. L. 2007. A Framework for Marketing Management. Pearson Prentice Hall, Upper Sadle River, pp. 4-10. 34Ghana Statistical Services 2000. Ghana Living Standards Survey: Report
on the Fourth Round (GLSS4). Accra, Ghana.
35Richards, E. M. 1997. Common Property Resource Institutions and Forest Management in Latin America. Development and Change 28: 95-117.
36Hammet, T. 1999. Special Forest Products: Identifying Opportunities for Sustainable Forest-based Development. Virginia Landowner Update, Virginia Tech.
37Hay, I. 2004. Qualitative Research Methods in Human Geography. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
38Cook, K. C. 1997. Participant observation. In Flowerden, R. and Martin,
D. (eds). Methods in Human Geography. A Guide for Students doing a Research Project. Sage Publications, London.
39Walter, S., Cole, D., Kathe, W., Lovett, P. and Paz Soldán, M. 2003. Impact of certification on the sustainable use of NWFP: Lessons- learnt from three case studies. International Conference on Rural Livelihoods, Forests and Biodiversity, 19-23 May 2003, Bonn, Germany.
40Mayers, J. and Kotey, N. A. 1996. Local Institutions and Adaptive Management in Ghana. IIED Forestry and Land Use Series No. 7. IIED, London.




