International Journal of Water Resources Development

ISSN: 0790-0627 (Print) 1360-0648 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cijw20

The impacts of dams on local livelihoods: a study
of the Bui Hydroelectric Project in Ghana

Peter Bilson Obour, Kwadwo Owusu, Edmond Akwasi Agyeman, Albert
Ahenkan & Àngel Navarro Madrid

To cite this article: Peter Bilson Obour, Kwadwo Owusu, Edmond Akwasi Agyeman, Albert
Ahenkan & Àngel Navarro Madrid (2016) The impacts of dams on local livelihoods: a study of
the Bui Hydroelectric Project in Ghana, International Journal of Water Resources Development,
32:2, 286-300, DOI: 10.1080/07900627.2015.1022892

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/07900627.2015.1022892

Published online: 18 Mar 2015.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 2409

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 11 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cijw20



International Journal of Water Resources Development, 2016
Vol. 32, No. 2, 286–300, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07900627.2015.1022892

The impacts of dams on local livelihoods: a study of the Bui
Hydroelectric Project in Ghana

Peter Bilson Oboura*, Kwadwo Owusub, Edmond Akwasi Agyemanc, Albert Ahenkand

and Àngel Navarro Madride

aDepartment of Agroecology, Faculty of Science and Technology, Aarhus University, Denmark;
bDepartment of Geography and Resource Development, University of Ghana, Accra; cCentre for
African Studies, University of Education, Winneba, Ghana; dDepartment of Public Administration
and Health Services Management, University of Ghana, Accra; eDepartamento de Análisis
Geográfico Regional y Geografía Física, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain

(Received 4 May 2014; accepted 21 February 2015)

The construction of the Bui Dam was expected to boost socio-economic development
in Ghana. This article examines the impacts of the project on the livelihoods of the local
people. Data were collected using a mixed-research approach and a case-study design.
The study finds that, while there have been significant improvements with respect to
resettlement and compensation issues as compared to the earlier dam projects in Ghana,
there are still some shortfalls. It is recommended that agriculture be improved by
providing extension services and inputs to improve food security and the economic
status of the local people.

Keywords: Bui; dams; Ghana; hydropower project; livelihood; social impacts

Introduction

Dam projects have been implemented to provide single or multiple benefits such as
provision of hydroelectricity, creation of waterways, flood control and provision of water
for agricultural activities, especially in drought-prone regions (Biswas, 2012; Terminski,
2013; World Commission on Dams [WCD], 2000; Yüksel, 2009). Nevertheless,
worldwide studies of dams and other watershed development projects have shown that
their implementation often comes with negative environmental, social and economic
impacts (McManus et al., 2010). Perhaps the most serious of these impacts are the
displacement and relocation of people who live within and around the proposed dam sites
(Terminski, 2013). Globally, the construction of dams has accounted for the physical
displacement of between 40 and 80 million people (WCD, 2000). This number might be
greater if those who are later forced to move due to the downstream impacts of dams were
included (Richter et al., 2010).

Over the years, a number of new dams have been constructed in developing regions
like Africa, and many are still currently under construction or at the planning stage
(International Rivers, 2010; King & McCartney, 2007). In Africa, dam projects are
envisaged to improve energy security as well as to provide a reliable supply of water for
drinking and irrigation purposes (Lautze & Kirshen, 2007; McCartney, 2007). However,
some of these projects have had adverse environmental and socio-economic impacts, and
rarely have they been able to improve the living conditions of the affected local population

*Corresponding author. Email: kopbilson@yahoo.com

q 2015 Taylor & Francis



International Journal of Water Resources Development 287

(Bazin, Skinner, & Koundouno, 2011). In most cases, the implementation of dam projects
has led to increased poverty, food insecurity, health problems and property loss amongst
people living in the catchment area (Gwazani et al., 2012). This is because, more often
than not, the negative impacts of dams are not totally envisaged, or are completely
disregarded at the planning stage, sometimes due to lack of transparency or effective
stakeholder participation (King & McCartney, 2007). In view of the benefits and the
negative impacts of dam projects, scholars are divided over whether new dams should be
constructed or avoided (Biswas, 2012). Several studies have been conducted on the
impacts of dams around the world (see e.g. Hanyona, 2005; Kioko, Elias, & Ayiemba,
2012; Maitra, 2009; Scudder, 2005; WCD, 2000). In the literature, however, there is no
consensus on the actual impacts of dam projects on local communities (International
Rivers Network [IRN], 2006; WCD, 2000).

This study examines the impacts of the newly constructed Bui Hydroelectric Project in
Ghana on the livelihood of local communities in the project area. The objectives of the
article are to ascertain the main socio-economic livelihood activities affected by the
project and to examine the effects of the Bui Resettlement Planning Framework –
resettlement and compensation – on the livelihoods of the local people. The study aims at
providing in-depth knowledge of the impacts of this new dam project. It could also serve
as a decision-supporting guide for governments and dam funders in the design and
implementation of future dam projects.

Dam debate in Ghana: the Bui Hydroelectric Project

Ghana depends hugely on hydroelectricity for household and industrial use. The sources of
hydro energy are the Akosombo and Kpong Dams, constructed in 1966 and 1982,
respectively. These two power plants together provide 1180MW of power for the country
(Energy Commission, 2012). The construction of both dams affected the livelihoods of the
local population in several ways. For instance, more than 88,000 people were displaced
and had to be resettled (Gyau-Boakye, 2001; Miescher, 2012; Tsikata, 2006). There were
also many irregularities associated with the compensation schemes. Other problems were
related to health and loss of sacred and cultural places.

The non-hydro sources of power in Ghana are mainly the Aboadze thermal plants
(550MW); Sunon-Asogli Power (200MW); Tema Thermal Power Plants 1 and 2
(159.5MW); and Mines Reserve Plant Diesel (80MW) (Energy Commission, 2012;
Hensengerth, 2011). But the power from these sources is not enough to provide the energy
required in Ghana. Consequently, the country has experienced frequent power cuts,
blackouts and load shedding in recent years (Miescher & Tsikata, 2009; Sackey, 2007).
Despite these challenges, it was projected that domestic and industrial consumption of
power in Ghana would rise from 7235GWh in 1997 to 11,953GWh in 2020. This implies
a need to increase power generation in the country (Environmental Resources
Management [ERM], 2007a).

As part of the measures to meet this power demand, Ghana became a signatory to the
West African Power Pool agreement in 2000. The aim was to boost power supply within
the Economic Community of West African States through building energy production
facilities and interconnecting the electricity grids of member countries (Pineau, 2008).
Construction of the West African Gas Pipeline to facilitate power supply from Nigeria was
one of the measures to solve the energy crises in the region.

Another measure to boost energy production in Ghana was the construction of a third
hydropower dam at Bui Gorge, a project which had been in the pipeline since the 1920s but



288 P.B. Obour et al. 3

had failed to materialize for political and economic reasons (Hensengerth, 2011; Miescher
& Tsikata, 2009; Okoampa-Ahoofe, 2009). In 2001, the government of Ghana reactivated
plans to begin the project, but once again was not successful, because the World Bank and
other multilateral financial partners declined to sponsor the project due to its perceived
social and environmental threats, including the flooding of Bui National Park (Benjamin,
2007). A breakthrough was finally reached in 2007, with the government of Ghana signing
an engineering, procurement and construction agreement with a Chinese company
(Sinohydro) and a French consultancy firm (Coyne et Bellier) to construct the dam
(Ampratwum-Mensah, 2011; ERM, 2006). The entire project was made up of a
1,000,000m3 roller-compacted concrete gravity dam with a full supply level of 183m.
It had a maximum height of 110m from the foundation and two saddle dams, with a
reservoir area of 444 km2 at full supply level. When the dam was fully operational, it
would generate an estimated 400MW of power, mainly to the northern grid, to supply
parts of Central and Northern Ghana. This was envisaged to bridge the north–south
development gap in Ghana (Osafo-Kissi & Akosa, 2009). The project is being
managed by the Bui Power Authority (BPA). The initial estimated cost of the project was
USD 624 million (Bui Power Authority [BPA], 2011). Two external sources of funding
were a concessional loan of USD 263.5 million from the government of China and a
buyer’s credit of USD 298.5 million from China’s Exim Bank. The remaining
USD 62 million was provided by the government of Ghana (Ampratwum-Mensah, 2011;
BPA, 2011).

Before commencement of the project, per requirements to meet national and
international environmental standards, an environmental and social impact assessment
was carried out. This included determining the feasibility of the dam as compared to other
alternative energy sources (ERM, 2007a). The assessment outlined some of the potential
adverse environmental, social and economic impacts of the project and how they could be
minimized (Alhassan, 2008; BPA, 2011).

The implementation of the project was expected to promote socio-economic
development in Ghana. The construction of the dam formed part of the projects under the
Energy Commission’s Strategic National Energy Plan to expand and sustain electricity
supply in Ghana between 2005 and 2025 (Hensengerth, 2011; KPMG, 2012). The
400MW of power that would be generated from the dam would enhance the security of
electricity supply in the country (BPA, 2011).

In addition, the Bui Dam project envisaged the construction of a fishing harbour and a
30,000 ha irrigation development scheme to expand agricultural production to improve
food security within the dam catchment area and the nation at large (Boateng, 2014; BPA,
2011). Also, as part of the repayment of the loan used to fund the project, the government
of China agreed to purchase 30,000 tonnes of Ghana’s cocoa at the present world market
price of cocoa for 5 years, beginning when the dam starts to operate (Hensengerth, 2013).
This was expected to create a ready market for cocoa production to increase the country’s
foreign exchange earnings and improve the livelihoods of cocoa farmers. At the local
level, the project was expected to provide benefits such as improvement in social
infrastructure like good roads, schools and hospitals that would boost the local economy
(Chris, 2006).

However, both national and international environmentalists and human right
activists opposed the project, in view of the potential negative environmental, health
and social impacts of the project on the local population (World Rainforest Movement,
2001). They argued that the perceived positive benefits mentioned above were
overstated, and that the potential negative effects (such as displacement of



International Journal of Water Resources Development 289

communities, dispossession of land, disruption of traditional values and impoverish-
ment of the dam-affected people) were deliberately underestimated by the dam
advocates to make the project more attractive to international sponsors (World
Rainforest Movement, 2001). Moreover, while the original estimate was that only 859
people would be displaced by the dam, recent statistics released by the dam authorities
show that 1216 were displaced, an excess of 40% (Ampratwum-Mensah, 2011). In spite
of these concerns, the government pushed ahead with the planning and construction of
the Bui Hydroelectric Project (Hensengerth, 2013).

Methodology

The study area

The study was carried out in seven communities displaced by the construction of the
Bui Hydroelectric Project. The communities included Bui, Bator/Akanyakrom,
Dokokyina, Brewohodi, Lucene, Agbegikuro and Dam Site) (Figure 1). The
resettlement process was divided into two phases. Phase 1 was carried out in 2008.
In this phase, four of the communities (Brewohodi, Lucene, Agbegikuro and Dam Site
were relocated to the Jama resettlement camp. The camp is close to Jama, the host
community. In Phase 2, Bui, Bator/Akanyakrom and Dokokyina were resettled in the
Bui resettlement camp.

The most populated community is Jama, with about 1500 inhabitants, followed by
Bator/Akanyakrom with 437. Agbegikuro has a total population of about 133 (BPA, 2011;
ERM, 2006). The population in the study area is composed of different ethnic groups,
namely Ewe (the predominant population in Agbegikuro and Bator/Akanyakrom), Mos
(predominant in Jama), Akan, Valaga, Gonja, Grushie, Banda and Dagarti. It is important
to mention that the Ewe are migrants from the Volta Region who settled in their present
location to fish after being displaced by the Akosombo Dam project in the 1960s
(ERM, 2007a; Tsikata, 2006). The Dagarti are also migrants, mostly from the Upper West
Region of Ghana. The Dagarti and the remaining ethnic groups predominantly
practise farming as their main source of economic sustenance. The selection of the
communities was purposively done to ensure that the findings of the study are
representative of the different economic and socio-cultural characteristics of the study
population.

Data collection

Primary data were collected using a mixed-research approach and a case-study design. The
purpose of the combined method was to facilitate the collection of quantitative and
qualitative data for the study and to capitalize on their respective strengths. The fieldwork
was conducted between June and August of 2011. The quantitative data was collected by
administering questionnaires (see the appendix for details) to household heads in the
selected communities. A household is defined as “a person or group of persons, who live
together in the same dwelling, share the same house-keeping arrangements and are catered
for as one unit” (Ghana Statistical Service, 2008, p. 4). Two main types of sampling
techniques were used. Stratified sampling was used to categorize the households based on
their community of residence prior to resettlement. Simple random sampling was then
used to select respondents from each stratum for questionnaire administration. A total of
139 respondents were interviewed, 110 from the resettled communities (39 from Bator/
Akayakrom, 11 from Dokokyina, 30 from Bui, 13 from Agbegikuro, and 17 from
Brewohodi) and 29 from Jama.



290 P.B. Obour et al. 5

Figure 1. Location of the Bui dam: A, Bui resettlement camp; B, Jama resettlement camp.

Qualitative data were collected using semi-structured and in-depth interview guides.
In addition, four separate focus group discussions were held, in Bator/Akanyakrom,
Dokokyina, Jama and Agbegikuro, to explore some of the issues discussed in the
questionnaire. This also helped generate data from different voices and perspectives. Each
of the groups was composed of between 8 and 10 people. The smaller sizes of focus groups
facilitated easy handling of groups and promoted in-depth discussion. An expert interview
was also held with the environmental officer for the Bui project. Interviews were



International Journal of Water Resources Development 291

conducted in Akan (Twi), the local language, widely spoken in Ghana. Prior to the
interviews, the participants’ consent was sought to record the discussion.

Quantitative data obtained from questionnaires were edited, cleaned, entered into
computer software and analyzed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences
(SPSS), version 20.0. They were then imported into Excel to generate descriptive data and
to make all statistical computations. The qualitative data were also transcribed and
analyzed using thematic analysis based on the objectives of the study.

Results and discussion

Impacts on existing economic activities prior to commencement of the Bui project

Before the dam was constructed, fishing and farming were the main economic activities in
the communities that were to be resettled. Fishing was the main income-generating
activity for the people of Agbegikuro and Bator/Akanyakrom. As can be seen in Figure 1,
the two fishing communities were situated very close to the Black Volta River.
Agbegikuro was about 30 metres from the river, and Bator/Akanyakrom about 40 metres.
According to the chief fisherman in Bator/Akanyakrom, the close proximity to the river
provided the fishermen easy access to carry out fishing activities. Before the
commencement of the dam, the seasonal flooding of the river occurred between June
and November (ERM, 2007a). The fishermen reported that the flood regime increased the
fish stock in the river between November and March. According to them, during this peak
fishing period, each fisherman would earn an average of GHS 500 (about USD 320; 1
GHS ¼ USD 0.64786 as of 15 September 2011) in a week. The money was used to
cater to the economic, social and health needs of household members. Some of the
catch was also exchanged directly for foodstuffs from the neighbouring farming
communities. This created some degree of social interdependence between the fishermen
and the farmers.

The fishermen stated that fishing activities have declined drastically since the
commencement of the dam project. The decline in fishing was attributed to limited
accessibility to fishing sites and to changes in downstream river flow. This is because the
locations where the fishing communities were resettled are several kilometres from the
section of the river where they used to fish. A 68-year-old man in Bator/Akanyakrom
complained about this situation in the following terms:

Even to go to the riverside is a problem; you have to walk for longer distance. . . . For
fishermen who are old and cannot walk like me sitting here, even if you carry me in a
palanquin, by the time I get there I will be tired and cannot do any fishing. So only the
energetic ones can still do some fishing.

An alternative could have been fishing in the downstream of the river, which is closer
and accessible from the Bui resettlement camp. But according to the fishermen who have
explored it, this is not possible because the impoundment of the dam has reduced the flow
rate of water in the downstream. Also, the BPA has a practice of opening the spillways of
the reservoir to allow excess water to flow, without any prior notice to the fishermen. This
practice has often resulted in the river carrying away their fishing nets and canoes, as this
fisherman at Bator/Akanyakrom said:

All our fishing boats and materials are there in the water. The problem is today you put your
net here and the next day no matter how early you go there, you find your net in a different
location very far from where you set the fishing net the previous day.

The decline in fish catch due to limited access to the riverside has contributed to the
collapse of the fishing industry in Bui. This is in contrast to the findings of Hart (1980),



292 P.B. Obour et al. 7

Mudzengi (2012) and Scudder (2005), who found that the construction of the Akosombo
Dam in Ghana, the Kariba Dam between Zambia and Zimbabwe, and the Siya Dam in
Zimbabwe led to expansion of the fishing activities among the local people. The decline of
the fish catch in Bui has precipitated changes in household dietary practices; households in
the two fishing communities no longer eat traditional meals prepared mainly from fish.
Also, the decline in fishing at Bui has led to other cultural and economic effects apart from
the nutritional shifts. In both Agbegikuro and Bator/Akayankrom, it was reported that
prior to the commencement of the project, they used to celebrate a community festival
which involved communal fishing. The catch from the communal fishing was distributed
among people within and outside the communities. But due to lack of access to fishing
sites, they can no longer celebrate the festival. There was a cascade of economic effects
due to the decline in fishing in Bui. The major effect is that the fishermen are unemployed.
This has in turn affected the economic activities of the women fishmongers, who used to
get their stock from the fishermen to supply markets within and outside the local area. As a
result, 43% of the fishermen and 28% of the fishmongers have shifted to farming, which is
not their traditional occupation.

Before the relocation, farming was the main economic activity in Dokokyina, Bui and
Brewohodi. The farmers operate on smallholding basis, with farm sizes ranging from 0.4
ha to a little over 1.4 ha. Farming is generally dependent on the seasonal rainfall pattern.
Unlike fishing, farming has rather remained fairly stable, with only a minimal decline in
the number of farmers since resettlement. This is probably because the BPA allocated new
farmlands to the resettled communities immediately after relocation, which enabled them
to continue with their farming activities.

Still, some farmers in all the farming communities reported that they faced many
challenges in the new locations which have undermined their household food and
economic security. Farmers at the Bui resettlement camp complained that farmlands in the
new locations are less fertile and thus cannot support the tuber crops like yam and cassava
which are their traditional crops. Also, the fixed size of farmland (0.8 ha) allocated to each
household has put stress on the farmers who wanted to make larger farms. Additionally,
some of the farmers interviewed in the Bui resettlement camp claimed they had not been
given enough time to harvest their produce in their former settlement before the filling of
the dam’s reservoir started. As a result, many of them lost their crops. In Bui, 54% of the
household heads said that as a survival strategy they resorted to buying foodstuffs from
outside markets in Bungase and Banda Ahenkro to feed their household members – a
practice they were not used to. This practice has therefore increased the economic burden
on the households of resettled farming communities. However, farmers in Jama indicated
that their yields have remained almost the same. They grow more of grain crops, like
maize, and cucurbitaceous plants, such as squash and gourd, than yam and cassava. This
could be an indication that the resettled farming communities may have challenges that are
due to their relocation and their not planting the crops suitable to the new farmlands.

Newly created economic activities from the construction of the Bui Dam project

Employment opportunities outside the agricultural sector in the study communities were
reported to be rare. Before the construction of the dam, the few existing ones were in the
teaching, health and wildlife sectors (ERM, 2007b). The local people generally have lower
levels of education, so they lacked the skills and competences to compete for the jobs
created by the dam construction. The prestigious formal jobs were the preserve of
expatriates and the Ghanaian educated folk who immigrated to the construction site from



International Journal of Water Resources Development 293

the urban areas. Even though the Bui Dam project was envisaged to create around 3400 job
opportunities (BPA, 2011), those who have benefited most are these immigrants. Only 14
of our 139 respondents were employed at the construction site. They were mainly taken on
as unskilled labourers such as carpenters, masons, drivers, welders, metal benders and
security officers, attracting lower salaries and wages. Also, the local workers complained
about poor safety precautions at the workplace and the precariousness of their posts.
During an interview, one of them said, “The least mistake you make, they show you the
exit.” Moreover, most of the local employees had temporary contracts, which will
terminate when the dam construction is completed. The results in Bui are in contrast to the
experience from the Manantali Dam in Mali, where construction of the dam created jobs
for the local people (Diop & Diedhiou, 2009). However, they substantiate the WCD (2000,
p. 99) argument that dam construction creates seasonal jobs, which require proper
planning in order to sustain the lasting benefits from the ‘boom phase’.

Another important new economic activity that has emerged is trade and commerce
around the construction site. This has boomed because of the presence of many immigrant
workers and tourists at the ongoing project. Also, the area has become more accessible
because the road transportation network in the area has been significantly improved since
the project began. This has created indirect jobs for the local women, the majority (70%)
of whom were those previously engaged in fishing. They have now become mostly food-
sellers, while others sell groceries.

Resettlement and compensation issues

As already stated, about 1216 people were displaced by the Bui Dam project. This number
is far below the 80,000 and 8000 people who were displaced during the construction of the
Akosombo and Kpong Dams, respectively, in Ghana (Gyau-Boakye, 2001; Tsikata, 2006).
Per the requirements of the World Bank and Ghana’s resettlement standards, those
displaced by the Bui Dam project needed to be resettled in a way that would improve their
livelihoods (ERM, 2007a). However, a majority of the resettlers interviewed indicated that
they were not given a choice of where they would like to be relocated. For example,
respondents from the two fishing communities reported that they requested to be relocated
very close to the river, but that was not accepted.

In terms of housing, the BPA provided new housing to all the households relocated to
the Jama and Bui resettlement camps (Figure 1). The two camps are about 9 km apart. This
study shows that there has been a remarkable improvement in the housing compensation
scheme for the Bui Dam project as compared to what pertained during the Akosombo Dam
project. During the Akosombo project, the resettled people were provided with a so-called
core house, made up of structures with one completed room (irrespective of the household
size), a concrete foundation, blocks, timber and roofing sheets. The occupants were
expected to complete the building (Chambers, 1970; Miescher & Tsikata, 2009; Raschid-
Sally, Akoto-Danso, Kalitsi, Ofori, & Koranteng, 2008). By contrast, in the case of the Bui
Dam project, households were resettled in completed block houses, roofed with zinc
aluminium sheets. The number of rooms allocated was based on what could be termed the
plus-one principle. That is, households were provided with one more room than they had
had before. The new structures also have a living room, a storeroom, a toilet and a
bathroom.

In general, satisfaction with the new homes was high among the resettled community
members. Only 19% of the resettlers were not satisfied with their new house. They
complained that the houses were built with low-quality materials. They also said that the



294 P.B. Obour et al. 9

roofing was poor and leaked when it rained. Nevertheless, a majority, constituting 81% of
the respondents, were satisfied with the new housing because they owned the title to the
new house. While this is an improvement over both the Akosombo and Kpong
resettlement schemes, in which the resettlers were not given legal title to their new houses
(Tsikata, 2006), the Bui dam resettlers were not satisfied with the location of their new
settlements. They also felt that the dam has impoverished them as a result. In one
interview, a household head from one of the fishing communities said, “I would have
preferred being relocated into a squatter house close to the river to enable me to have easy
access to the river than living in plush houses located far away from the river.”

The project also led to development of social amenities such as electrification and
improved roads in the resettlement sites, host community and in surrounding towns, which
were previously lacking in the area. Two modern school blocks were built by the BPA in
the Bui resettlement camp, for primary and junior secondary schools. However, in the
Jama resettlement camp, no new school blocks were constructed. Instead, because of the
proximity of the camp to Jama, the BPA expanded the existing school structures in the host
community. No health facility was built in any of the camps, but the health centres in Jama
and Bungase (about 3 km from the Bui resettlement camp) were upgraded to provide
services to the resettlers. Although residents in the resettled community were happy they
had gotten electricity, they also complained about the increasing cost of electricity bills –
they were not used to paying electricity bills – and felt that this had increased their
economic burdens. In the host community and the Jama resettlement camp, residents
complained that the health centre was short of health personnel and medicine. They also
complained about overcrowding in the school classrooms in spite of the expansion work
by the BPA.

Land tenure system and land compensation

The impoundment of the Bui Dam flooded large tracts of farmland. Ninety-eight of the 139
respondents lost their farmlands in the filling of the dam reservoir. Figure 2 shows the sizes
of farmlands lost by respondents.

The BPA was supposed to compensate people whose farmlands were flooded. But
before delving into the details of how compensation was resolved and its shortfalls, it is
important to first highlight the land tenure arrangement in the Bui area. Most of the
farmlands are skin/stool lands,1 with few family-owned lands. In the case of the latter,
family members have customary freehold in the land. On the other hand, migrants and

Don’t
remember
actual size,

16% < 4 hectares,
> 10 hectares, 34%

10%

Between 4 and
10 hectares,

40%

Figure 2. Distribution of area of respondents’ farmland submerged by the reservoir.



International Journal of Water Resources Development 295

other non-members of the land-owning skins and families access land through traditional
methods such as renting, or through the abunu and abusa share-cropping systems
(ERM, 2007a).2

The farmlands that were flooded by the dam were either skin or family lands.
According to the Bui Resettlement Planning Framework, only the farmlands that had been
evaluated prior to the flooding would be compensated (ERM, 2007b). All the farmlands
would be compensated with new farmlands. The new farmlands would be allotted to
landowners and farmers with proof of documentation of land grants. The Bui land
compensation scheme was chosen to avoid some of the land compensation failures of the
earlier dam schemes in Ghana (ERM, 2007b).

An important improvement of the Bui land compensation scheme over the Akosombo
scheme is that all the properties except land earmarked for inundation were assessed by the
Land Valuation Board before the commencement of the project (ERM, 2007b). The actual
compensation comprised both land and cash, as had been adopted in the Kpong project in
Ghana (Tsikata, 2006) and the Manantali Dam in Mali (de Wet, 2000). Farmlands were
compensated with new farmlands in the new location, while other land properties like
economic trees were to be compensated in cash. The land compensation was completed in
2012. The advantage of land-for-land compensation was that it minimized situations
where those who received cash mismanaged it, making them poorer than before, as was
experienced in the Akosombo project (de Wet, 2000; Miescher & Tsikata, 2009).
However, 55% of the farmers interviewed in Bui said that adequate cash compensation
would have enabled them to diversify from farming to non-agricultural jobs such as
trading and drinking bar operation. Another 45% of the farmers said that cash
compensation would have enabled them to engage in the aforementioned non-agricultural
activities in addition to other agro-enterprises like bee-keeping and grass-cutter rearing to
provide them with alternative sources of income.

Unlike the Akosombo and Kpong projects, in which the resettlers were not given
ownership title to their new lands (Tsikata, 2006), those in Bui were granted legal title to
the new farmlands. However, each household was given the same area, 0.8 ha, regardless
of the area held before. This led to a general decline in the average size of farmland, which
is a major concern to the resettlers who are farmers. They argued this has limited their
ability to start bigger farms. They also felt that the reduced size of farmland prevented
them from cultivating economic tree crops like teak and cashew, which used to be
alternative sources of income. Others envisaged that this would lead to land scarcity in the
area for the future generations.

A major novelty of the Bui compensation scheme compared to the Akosombo and
Kpong projects is related to monetary compensation. Apart from cash compensation for
loss of property, the resettlers were also given financial support. It included a resettlement
grant of GHS 50 to support the resettlers’ starting a new farm, and a monthly supporting
grant of GHS 100, paid to each household for one year (BPA, 2011). The purpose was to
provide financial security for the resettlers with the hope that, by the end of one year, they
would have more sustainable income-generating sources. In Agbegikuro and Brewohodi,
where the financial support ended in 2010, the resettlers reported that it was insufficient.
However, the resettlers in Bui resettlement camp said the support was sufficient, but
household expenditure on food had increased so they could barely save part of the money
for unforeseen circumstances. In Bator/Akayankrom and Agbegikuro, the fishermen stated
that the resettlement assistance would have been more beneficial to them if BPA had
provided them fishing equipment instead of giving them the monetary grant to start new
farms, since farming was not their traditional occupation.



296 P.B. Obour et al. 11

Cash compensation for loss of property at Bui, as with the Akosombo and Kpong
dams, is faced with several loopholes. In the latter cases, land and other properties were
evaluated after the land was flooded. This led to compensation irregularities and prolonged
conflicts between the affected communities and the government (Ghana News Agency
[GNA], 2014a). Currently, legal inquiry is ongoing to examine payments perceived to be
fraudulent compensation made to some chiefs and individuals in the affected communities
under the Judgement Debt Commission (Ghana News Agency [GNA], 2014b). In the case
of Bui, properties like crops, trees and farmlands expected to be affected by the project
were surveyed and valued prior to the filling of the reservoir (ERM, 2007b). The total
amount to be compensated for economic trees (mostly cashew plantations) was USD
1,093,413, while compensation for food crops (cassava and yam) was estimated at USD
88,267. Yet, no cash compensation had been made at the time of the fieldwork in 2011.

Effects of the Bui Dam project on out-migration

The research was carried out in the period when the construction of the project was still
ongoing, and therefore it is difficult to give a detailed account of the effects of the project
on emigration of the local population. In general, most respondents in the host community
have plans to stay, because they expected the area to “soon open up to tourist activities
when the dam is completed”.

However, the story is not the same for the resettled communities. For instance, in the
two fishing communities, the fishermen said they were awaiting the construction of the
proposed Bui fishing harbour so that they can reinstate fishing activities. They emphasized
that if this expectation was not met, they would embark on a ‘second relocation’ in which
they will abandon the present settlements to settle on other accessible areas of the reservoir
to carry out their lucrative fishing activities. At Bator/Akanyakrom, the chief said:

We still do not like this place. . . . Now that the river is impounded, you should not be
surprised to one day come here and see that all the youthful population is all gone. . . . They
will relocate and you will come to meet empty structures here.

There are similar reports among the people who were resettled during the Akosombo
Dam project in 1966. Most of the resettlers moved to settle at the banks of the Volta River,
where they could fish or farm (Okoampa-Ahoofe, 2009; Tsikata, 2006). Moreover, 25% of
the young men interviewed had plans to travel to the cities. Others mentioned moving
outside Ghana to seek greener pastures. In contrast, the elderly men and women
interviewed said that they have no immediate or long-term plans to move, because of
family reasons and lack of the initial capital they would need to move.

Conclusions and recommendations

This article has discussed the impacts of the Bui Dam project on the livelihoods of the
people of the resettled communities and how resettlement and compensation issues were
handled. The project was implemented to improve electric power generation and irrigation
to improve food security in Ghana. It was also expected to provide several benefits to
facilitate socio-economic development at the local and national levels. The
implementation of the project since 2007 has coincided with a period when dam projects
are expected to meet stricter environmental and socio-economic standards. Therefore, the
design and implementation of the project were intended to meet national and international
requirements. The study found that the commencement of the project has led to
improvements in local infrastructure (road network, drinking water, health and education



International Journal of Water Resources Development 297

facilities) and creation of new job opportunities for at least a few of the local people. Also,
the Bui compensation and resettlement schemes are significantly improved as compared
with the Akosombo and Kpong experiences in Ghana. In spite of these improvements,
some of the shortfalls encountered in the earlier dam projects have remained. Much still
remains to be done to improve the livelihoods of the affected communities. Based on these
findings, therefore, the following recommendations are made.

To improve agriculture in the new settlements, in addition to financial support for
farming, dam project implementers should provide farmers with affordable farm inputs.
Also, skill training and services of agriculture extension officers would help the farmers
adapt and improve their farming activities in the new locations. This would help sustain
the food security of the resettled households.

Future dam projects must also be accompanied by support schemes and small-scale
economic activities such as industries and handicraft businesses. These would provide
alternative jobs for both the resettled and host populations. Also, existing economic
activities such as fishing can be diversified by, for instance, introducing cage fishing and
aquaculture. This would enable the local people to retain their traditional occupations and
minimize the tendency of emigration, especially among the active population.

Finally, future relocation schemes must try as much as possible to avoid disruption of
the traditional economic activities and cultural practices of the local communities as
experienced at Bui, Akosombo, Kpong and elsewhere. This could be achieved by
consulting and actively involving the local leaders during the planning and
implementation phases.

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

Notes
1. This refers to land that belongs to the whole community, past, present and future generations.

Tenure arrangements are governed by traditional and customary norms and practices. The titular
heads of the traditional communities who own the land are known as skins or stools.

2. Abunu involves sharecropping on an equal basis (50:50) between the landowner and tenant;
abusa is sharecropping on a 1:2 basis between the landowner and tenant.

References
Alhassan, H. S. (2008). Large dams in contemporary Africa: A development imperative, “the tyranny

of technology”, or a “subversion of southern countries’ development? (Published, PhD Thesis).
University of East Anglia.

Ampratwum-Mensah, A. (2011, August 5). The Bui hydroelectric power project-bare facts.
Daily Graphic, p. 21.

Bazin, F., Skinner, J., & Koundouno, J. (Eds.). (2011). Sharing the water, sharing the benefits:
Lessons from six large dams in West Africa. London: International Institute for Environment and
Development.

Benjamin, C. (2007, February 21). $25 million seed money for Bui city. The Statesman. Retrieved
from http://chrisbenjaminwriting.com/25m-seed-money-for-bui-city/

Biswas, A. (2012). Impacts of large dams: Issues, opportunities and constraints. In C. Tortajada,
D. Altinbilek, & A. Biswas (Eds.), Impacts of large dams: A global assessment. Water resources
development and management (pp. 1–18). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-
23571-9.

Boateng, G. (2014). Foreign aid and poverty reduction. Accra: African Center for Economic
Transformation (ACET).



298 P.B. Obour et al. 13

Bui Power Authority [BPA]. (2011). Leaflet describing the Bui hydropower project, background and
proposed benefits. Accra: Bui Power Authority.

Chambers, R. (1970). The Volta resettlement experience. London: Pall Mall Press.
Chris, G. (2006). Background paper for the multi-stakeholder consultation process for dams’

development in Ghana. Accra: Volta Basin Research Project University of Ghana.
de Wet, C. (2000). The experience with dams and resettlement in Africa. World Commission on

Dams Working Paper, prepared as an input to the World Commission on Dams, Cape Town,
Thematic Review 1.3: displacement, resettlement, rehabilitation, reparation and development
(2000), pp. 6–7. Retrieved from http://www.dams.org/docs/kbase/contrib/soc199.pdf

Diop, M. D., & Diedhiou, C. M. (2009). Sharing the benefits of large dams in West Africa: The case
of displaced people. Retrieved from http://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/displacedpeople_iied_
eng.pdf

Energy Commission. (2012). Energy supply and demand outlook for Ghana. Accra: Energy
Commission.

Environmental Resources Management [ERM]. (2006). Baseline and scoping report: Environmental
and social impact assessment study of the Bui Hydropower Project. Prepared by Environmental
Resources Management, in association with SGS Environment for the Ministry of Energy/Bui
Development Committee, Ghana.

Environmental Resources Management [ERM]. (2007a). Environmental and social impact
assessment of the Bui Hydropower Project. Prepared by Environmental Resources Management,
in association with SGS Environment for the Ministry of Energy/Bui Development Committee,
Ghana.

Environmental Resources Management [ERM]. (2007b). Resettlement planning framework of the
Bui Hydropower Project. Prepared by Environmental Resources Management, in association
with SGS Environment for the Ministry of Energy/Bui Development Committee, Ghana.

Ghana News Agency [GNA]. (2014a). Inundated areas of Bui dam well documented – expert.
Regional News of Thursday, 11 September, Accra.

Ghana News Agency [GNA]. (2014b). Judgment Debt Commission moves to discover unnamed
beneficiaries. Thursday 29 May, Accra.

Ghana Statistical Service. (2008). Ghana living standard survey of the fifth round report (GLSS 5).
Accra: Sakoa Press.

Gwazani, R., Gandiwa, E., Gandiwa, P., Mhaka, V., Hungwe, T., & Muza, M. (2012). The socio-
ecological impacts of Mushandike dam, Masvingo, Zimbabwe. Journal of Sustainable
Development in Africa, 14, 184–194.

Gyau-Boakye, P. (2001). Environmental impacts of the Akosombo dam and effects of climate
change on the lake levels. Environment, Development and Sustainability, 3, 17–29. doi:10.1023/
A:1011402116047.

Hanyona, S. (2005). Zambia’s Tonga people reveal their environmental testimonies. Motion
Magazine. 25 October. Retrieved from http://www.inmotionmagazine.com/global/s_hanyona.
html

Hart, K. (1980). The Volta river project: A case study in politics and technology. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.

Hensengerth, O. (2011). Interaction of Chinese institutions with host governments in dam
construction: The Bui dam in Ghana Discussion paper 3. Bonn: German Development Institute.

Hensengerth, O. (2013). Chinese hydropower companies and environmental norms in countries of
the global South: The involvement of Sinohydro in Ghana’s Bui dam. Environment,
Development and Sustainability, 15, 285–300. doi:10.1007/s10668-012-9410-4.

International Rivers. (2010). African dams briefing 2010. Retrieved from http://www.
internationalrivers.org/files/attached-files/afrdamsbriefingjune2010.pdf

International Rivers Network [IRN]. (2006). In-depth: Running dry: The humanitarian impact of the
global water crisis. Nairobi: IRIN publishers. Retrieved from: http://www.irinnews.org/pdf/in-
depth/Running-Dry-IRIN-In-Depth.pdf

King, J., & McCartney, M. (2007). Introduction: Dams, ecosystems and livelihoods. International
Journal of River Basin Management, 5, 167–168. doi:10.1080/15715124.2007.9635316.

Kioko, J. B., Elias, H. O., & Ayiemba, E. (2012). Effects of technological development on rural
livelihoods in developing world: A case study of effects of a large scale multipurpose dam on
malaria prevalence in a rural community around Kenya’s largest dam. European Scientific
Journal, 8, 132–148.



International Journal of Water Resources Development 299

KPMG. (2012). Doing business: Hydropower in Ghana. Retrieved from https://www.kpmg.com/
GH/en/Documents/Doing%20business%20in%20Ghana%20-2012.pdf

Lautze, J., & Kirshen, P. (2007). Dams, health, and livelihoods: Lessons from the Senegal,
suggestions for Africa. International Journal of River Basin Management, 5, 199–206. doi:10.
1080/15715124.2007.9635320.

Maitra, S. (2009). Development induced displacement: Issues of compensation and resettlement –
experiences from the Narmada Valley and Sardar Sarovar project. Japanese Journal of Political
Science, 10, 191–211. doi:10.1017/S1468109909003491.

McCartney, M. P. (2007). Decision support systems for large dam planning and operation in Africa
(p. 47). (IWMI Working Paper 119). Colombo: International Water Management Institute.

McManus, D. P., Gray, D. J., Li, Y. Y., Feng, Z. Z., Williams, G. M., Stewart, D., & . . . Ross, A. G.
(2010). Schistosomiasis in the People’s Republic of China: The era of the Three Gorges dam.
Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 23, 442–466. doi:10.1128/CMR.00044-09.

Miescher, S. F. (2012). Building the city of the future: Visions and experiences of modernity in
Ghana’s Akosombo township. The Journal of African History, 53, 367–390. doi:10.1017/
S0021853712000679.

Miescher, S. F., & Tsikata, D. (2009). Hydro-power and the promise of modernity and development
in Ghana: Comparing the Akosombo and Bui dam projects. Ghana Studies, 12/13, 15–53.

Mudzengi, K. B. (2012). An assessment of the socio-economic impacts of the construction of Siya
dam in the Mazungunye area: Bikita district of Zimbabwe. Journal of Sustainable Development
in Africa, 14, 1–17.

Okoampa-Ahoofe, K. (2009). The under-told story of Akosombo-The Gbedemah factor (Part 1).
Statesman Newspaper. 14/12/2009. Retrieved from http://www.thestatesmanonline.com/pages/
news_detail.php

Osafo-Kissi, A. B., & Akosa, K. S. (2009). Bui bridges the development gap between north and south
in Ghana. International Journal on Hydropower & Dams, 16, 79–82.

Pineau, P. -O. (2008). Electricity sector integration in West Africa. Energy Policy, 36, 210–223.
doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2007.09.002.

Raschid-Sally, L., Akoto-Danso, E. K., Kalitsi, E. A. K., Ofori, B. D., & Koranteng, R. T. (2008).
The resettlement experience of Ghana analyzed via case studies of the Akosombo and Kpong
dams. Paper presented at the 9th Annual Symposium on Poverty Research in Sri Lanka exploring
experiences of resettlement.

Richter, B. D., Postel, S., Revenga, C., Scudder, T., Lehner, B., Churchill, A., & Chow, M. (2010).
Lost in development’s shadow: The downstream human consequences of dams. Water
Alternatives, 3, 14–42.

Sackey, T. (2007). Why power shortage? In A. Brew-Hammond & F. Kemausuor (Eds.), Energy
crisis in Ghana: Drought, technology or policy? (pp. 6–16). Kumasi: Kwame Nkrumah
University of Science and Technology Press.

Scudder, T. (2005). The future of large dams: Dealing with social, environmental, institutional and
political costs. London: Earthscan.

Terminski, B. (2013).Development-induced displacement and resettlement: Theoretical frameworks
and current challenges. CEDEM Research Paper University of Liege.

Tsikata, D. (2006). Living in the shadow of the large dams: Long term responses of downstream and
lakeside communities of Ghana Volta river project. Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers.

World Commission on Dams. (2000). Dams and development: A new framework for decision-
making. London: Earthscan Publications.

World Rainforest Movement. (2001). Ghana: What’s hidden behind the Bui dam project? Dams:
Struggles against the modern dinosaurs. WRM’s bulletin No. 46, May. Montevideo: World
Rainforest Movement Secretariat.

Yüksel, I. (2009). Dams and hydropower for sustainable development. Energy Sources, Part B:
Economics, Planning, and Policy, 4, 100–110. doi:10.1080/15567240701425808.



300 P.B. Obour et al. 15

Appendix

Appendix 1. Types of information collected during the field survey.

Theme on questionnaire Specific information collected

Background information of respondents Gender, age, occupation, household size,
level of educational attained

Socio-economic impacts of the Bui Main occupation before and after
dam project resettlement, effects of project on

occupation, employment, ancestral relations
Loss of property and compensation Land property and size, compensation

for land, size of new
land, loss of other forms
of properties and compensation, satisfaction
with compensation

Description of old settlement* Socio-economic facilities, water, toilet, school
infrastructure and health centre

Description of new settlement* Socio-economic facilities, water, toilet, school
infrastructure and health centre

Description of housing units before Type, number of rooms, toilet
and after resettlement* facility, electricity

Satisfaction with the new settlement* Comparison of settlements before and
after resettlement, rating of satisfaction

Relationship with the host or Economic, social and cultural activities
resettled community performed together, experience of discrimination

Knowledge and participation in project Grass-roots representation in decision making,
management representatives, roles of representatives, satisfaction

with involvement in project management

*Questions specifically designed for resettled household respondents