J HEALTH POPUL NUTR 2011 Apr;29(2):141-148
ISSN 1606-0997 | $ 5.00+0.20

©INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR DIARRHOEAL
DISEASE RESEARCH, BANGLADESH

Improving Nutrition and Health through Non-timber
Forest Products in Ghana
Albert Ahenkan and Emmanuel Boon
Human Ecology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 103, B1090, Jette, Brussels, Belgium

ABSTRACT
Nutrition and health are fundamental pillars of human development across the entire life-span. The potential role of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) in improving nutrition and health and reduction of
poverty has been recognized in recent years. NTFPs continue to be an important source of household
food security, nutrition, and health. Despite their significant contribution to food security, nutrition, and
sustainable livelihoods, these tend to be overlooked by policy-makers. NTFPs have not been accorded adequate attention in development planning and in nutrition-improvement programmes in Ghana. Using
exploratory and participatory research methods, this study identified the potentials of NTFPs in improving
nutrition and food security in the country. Data collected from the survey were analyzed using the SPSS
software (version 16.0). Pearson’s correlation (p<0.05) showed that a significant association exists between
NTFPs and household food security, nutrition, and income among the populations of Bibiani-Bekwai and
Sefwi Wiawso districts in the western region of Ghana. NTFPs contributed significantly to nutrition and
health of the poor in the two districts, especially during the lean seasons. The results of the survey also indicated that 90% of the sampled population used plant medicine to cure various ailments, including malaria,
typhoid, fever, diarrhoea, arthritis, rheumatism, and snake-bite. However, a number of factors, including
policy vacuum, increased overharvesting of NTFPs, destruction of natural habitats, bushfires, poor farming
practices, population growth, and market demand, are hindering the use and development of NTFPs in
Ghana. The study also provides relevant information that policy-makers and development actors require
for improving nutrition and health in Ghana.
Key words: Forest; Food security; Health; Nutrition disorders; Micronutrients; Non-timber forest products;
Nutrition; Plant medicine; Poverty alleviation; Ghana

INTRODUCTION
Globally, nutrition and health have improved in
recent decades but malnutrition, including deficiencies in micronutrients, is still widespread, particularly in developing countries (1-2). Nutrition
and health are fundamental pillars of human development across the entire life-span (2). In recent
years, increased attention has been focused on the
potential role of non-timber forest products (NTFPs)
in reduction of poverty, in improving nutrition
and health, and sustainable management of forest resources (3-7). The term NTFPs encompasses
Correspondence and reprint requests should be
addressed to:
Dr. Albert Ahenkan
Human Ecology Department
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Laarbeeklaan 103
B1090, Jette, Brussels
Belgium
Email: aahenkan@vub.ac.be
Fax: +32 2 477 49 64

all biological materials other than timber which
are extracted from forests, other wooded land, and
trees outside forests and domesticated that include
products used as food and food additives (edible
nuts, mushrooms, grass-cutters, snails, fruits, herbs,
spices and condiments, aromatic plants, game), fibres (used in construction, furniture, clothing, or
utensils), resins, gums, and plant and animal products used for medicinal, cosmetic or cultural purpose for human use (8-10). NTFPs form an integral
part of the livelihood strategy of rural communities in the tropics and continue to be an important
component of household nutrition and health in
Africa (11-12). They are particularly an important
component of household subsistence, especially in
terms of food consumption, nutrition, and health.
In Ghana, a considerable amount of food and medicinal plants can be gathered from the forest and
bushy fallow areas or are semi-domesticated (1314). NTFPs contribute substantially to nutrition,
either as part of the family diet or as a means to
achieve household food security (13-14). They also

Ahenkan A and Boon E

NTFPs, nutrition, and health in Ghana

improve health through the prevention and treatment of diseases (15-19).
Although Ghana, compared to other sub-Saharan
countries, has a low prevalence of stunting on average (20), there has been no significant change in
rates of mortality of children aged less than five
years and infants of Ghana during 1993-2003. Poverty and decline in food availability and accessibility are the main underlying causes of malnutrition
in Ghana (21). Asibey-Berko estimated that Ghana
would lose 161 million dollar as the cost of health
expenditure and low productivity if measures are
not taken to improve malnutrition and other irondeficiency anaemia of its population (22). About
54% of all deaths beyond early infancy are associated with protein-energy malnutrition, making it the single greatest cause of child mortality in
Ghana (23). Interventions to prevent micronutrient deficiencies would best be addressed through
food-based strategies, such as dietary diversification
through home-gardens and NTFPs (24).
Despite this vital role of NTFPs, their potential contribution to food security, nutrition, health, and
sustainable livelihoods tends to be overlooked by
policy-makers in Ghana. NTFPs have not been accorded adequate attention in development planning and in nutrition-improvement programmes
in the country. Research on NTFPs in Ghana is relatively new and has received very little formal investigation. Most recent nutritional studies focus on
staple foods, such as cassava and maize. Very little
research has been conducted to assess the potential contribution of NTFPs to nutrition, health, and
food security of rural communities in Ghana. Inventories of NTFPs by the Forestry Commission of
Ghana focused only on rattans, climbers, and other
minor tree species (1). The Ghana Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (GPRSP) also failed to consider
NTFPs and their nutritional and health linkages.
Various attempts to value NTFPs have examined
only the current local market-value of these products and have not attempted any in-depth evaluation of the benefits to rural communities of health
and nutrition strategies (1). This paper, therefore,
seeks to examine the contribution of NTFPs to
household nutrition, health, food security, and
poverty reduction in Bibiani-Bekwai district (BBD)
and Sefwi Wiawso district (SWD) and to identify
the types and uses of NTFPs in the two districts.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study location
The study was carried out in the two districts as
mentioned (Fig. 1), located in the western region
142

of Ghana during April-July 2009. These two adjoining districts were selected because these constitute a major production area for NTFPs in Ghana.
Moreover, these have common natural, social and
economic characteristics that indicate high dependence on forest.

Data-collection and analysis
In addition to an extensive literature review, both
secondary and primary data were collected for
the study. Secondary data, including documentation on food security, farming of NTFPs, medicinal
plants, and their therapeutic uses, were collected
from the District Directorate of Agriculture and
Health Services Departments of the two districts,
Ghana Food Research Institute, and published data
from the Ministry of Health and World Health
Organization. Five exploratory and participatory
research methods, including key-informants interviews (26), administration of a questionnaire,
observations of participants (27-28), focus-group
discussions (FGDs) (29), and consultations with
stakeholders were used for soliciting responses of
communities to the farming, collection, and consumption of NTFPs and also to various facets of
nutrition and food security-related issues.
A field survey in the two selected districts was conducted during April-July 2009. A purposive sampling technique, based on field expertise of the
participants on NTFPs and nutrition-related issues
in the districts, was used for selecting key-informants. To ensure a broad-based and objective datacollection, a carefully-designed questionnaire was
administered to the key-informants knowledgeable
in NTFPs and nutrition and health issues in the two
districts. A structured questionnaire was the main
research instrument used for collecting primary
data from 200 randomly-selected heads of households from 10 communities in the two districts.
Ten household heads were randomly selected and
interviewed per community. The communities include Sui, Nkonya, Ahokwaa, Bosomoiso, Wiawso,
Ahwiaa, Adupri, Bekwai, Atronsu, and Tanoso. Data
were also collected on a quarterly basis from farmers and collectors of NTFPs through a survey that
assembled information on the size of household,
occupation, trends of production, sales, income,
consumption, acquisition of assets, health, education of children, employment, and farming practices during 2008-2009. Health-related information
included knowledge and use of medicinal plants,
sources of household nutrition, and frequency of
consumption of NTFPs.
JHPN

Ahenkan A and Boon E

NTFPs, nutrition, and health in Ghana

Fig.1. Bibiani-Bekwai and Sefwi Wiawso districts (25)

Observation of the participants comprised visits to
NTFP farms of the 20 respondents, market centres,
and traders during April-July 2009, aiming at verifying and identifying various NTFPs that farmers
collect, consume, or trade in. Further exploratory
FGDs on farming of NTFPs, collection, use, marketing, management, and key challenges were conducted with women groups in five communities
engaged in farming of NTFPs. To ensure the reliability and validity of data, it was triangulated with
information collected from the households and
interviews of key-informants. Collected data were
quantified and entered into the SPSS software (version 16.0), and the results were analyzed. To ascertain the degree of association between the contribution of NTFPs to food security and the nutritional
sources of the respondents, a Pearson’s correlation
was performed.

RESULTS
About 80% of the labour force in the two districts
was involved in agriculture, particularly cocoa,
maize, oil-palm, cassava, cocoyam, and plantain
production. However, agricultural productivity in
these districts was quite low because of small farm
holdings. Except cocoa, most farmers grow crops
primarily for consumption in the home. Sources of
food included market, farm produces, and collection of NTFPs.
The survey found that, in addition to the collection of a large variety of NTFPs from the wild,
Volume 29 | Number 2 | April 2011

the respondents were mostly active in bee-keeping
(44.4%), followed by grass-cutter production
(39.8%) and snail rearing (29.3%) while 28.6% and
2.3% were engaged, respectively, in the production
of mushrooms and medicinal plants to supplement their food, nutritional sources, and incomes.
Of the 200 farmers sampled in Sefwi Wiawso and
Bibiani-Bekwai districts, 80% and 85% respectively
got some cash income from harvesting and farming of NTFPs, which contributed, on average, 35%
of the total annual income. To determine the percentage of NTFP-based income and dependency on
NTFPs, the respondents were classified into ‘rich’
and ‘poor’ income quintiles, based on the average
annual incomes of the households surveyed and
Ghana’s Fourth Living Standard Survey (25). The
survey revealed that about 32%, particularly the
poor-income group, got more than half of their
total income on NTFPs (Table 1).

Contribution of NTFPs to household
nutrition and health
During the interviews and FGDs in the field, farmers and women groups in the two districts indentified various NTFPs and ranked their importance
in terms of their contribution to food, nutrition,
health, and income. These products are mostly
food products, medicinal plants, hygiene tools,
household goods, and ornaments. Figure 2 depicts
the comparative importance of NTFPs and the frequency of their usage among the respondents.
143

Ahenkan A and Boon E

NTFPs, nutrition, and health in Ghana

Table 1. Annual income and share of NTFPbased income among respondents
Income
quintile of
respondents

Annual
income
(GH¢)

%

NTFP-based
income as
share of
total income (%)

1 ‘rich’
5
5,000-6,000
25
2
41 3,000-4,900
28
3
23 2,000-3,000
45
4
16 1,500-2,000
51
5 ‘poor’
15
650-1,000
55
‘1’ represents the upper (high-income) quintile,
and ‘5’ represents the lower (low-income) quintile US$ 1=1 GH¢.45
The NTFPs species found to be the most important
and constituting part of the daily nutrition sources
of the respondents were edible animals and plant
products, followed by medicinal and ornamental
plants as indicated by shaded portions in the figure.
The more important is the product to the respondent, the longer the shaded portion of the figure
compared to the centre point. These products contributed significantly to household food security,
nutrition, health, and income in the two districts,
especially during the lean season (June-August).
These provide essential proteins, vitamins, minerals, and carbohydrates to the households (29). The
respondents emphasized the importance of NTFPs,
such as grass-cutters (Thryonomys swinderianus), antelopes, monkeys, snail, mushrooms, and fruits in
their diets. The most widely-consumed NTFPs were
bushmeat, mushrooms, snails, leaves-food, honey,
and fruits.
Fig. 2. Importance of some NTFPs to respondents
Bushmeat
Chewing sticks
Grinders/pestles

Wooden trays 80
60
Spices
Seeds
Tubers

40
20
0

Snails

Fruits
Honey
Leaves-food

food wrappers
Mushrooms
Mats
Mortars
Medicinal plants

NTFPs=Non-timber forest products

Frequency of use of NTFPs
The contribution of NTFPs to the household dietary patterns did not vary significantly between the
144

two districts. However, the contribution to household diet varied from one to another village and
was largely a function of the environmental, sociocultural and economic contexts. For instance, the
households in Ahokwa, Atronsu, Sui, and Nkonya
tended to consume more NTFPs compared to those
in other communities in the study area, which
might probably be due to their proximity to forest reserves. The consumption of NTFPs among the
poor households was also greater than the middleincome groups. The low-income households in the
two districts consumed NTFPs for 5-6 days a week.
The moderate-income groups consumed NTFPs,
on average, three days a week. The most widelyconsumed NTFPs, such as mushrooms, snails, and
fruits, are available seasonally. However, because of
domestication of these products, most farmers were
able to consume the products during most parts of
the year, especially grass-cutters, snails, mushrooms,
and honey. Leaves were eaten regularly throughout
the year by most (87%) households sampled. The
surveyed NTFPs were consumed in varying quantities daily, weekly, occasionally, or rarely. Table
2 shows the frequency of consumption patterns
when the product is available in the year.
These products also contributed significantly to
household income and food security through their
collection and sales at the local markets. Household
food security does not only depend on the availability of an adequate and sustainable supply of food
but also on the means employed by households to
acquire the needed food. Using the Household Dietary Diversity Score, the large majority (75%) of
the respondents were food-secure while 25% were
food-insecure. The results showed that a significant
association (p<0.05) existed between NTFPs and
household food security and nutrition (Table 3).

Contribution of NTFPs to health
Health is another important aspect of rural life. NTFPs
make a crucial contribution to health through the
supply of plant medicines. The majority (56%) of
the population surveyed in the study area relied
on plant medicines for their healthcare. Fifty of
65 plants species identified by the respondents all
have medicinal properties to cure various ailments
and diseases. Most species had more than a single
therapeutic use. This was confirmed by the Ghana
Centre for Scientific Research into Plant Medicine
during consultations with stakeholders. The majority (67%) of the respondents had some knowledge/
skill on how to prepare medicines from plant-parts.
They were found not only to depend on the traditional healers for the remedies but they also prepared some medicine themselves. Ninety percent
JHPN

NTFPs, nutrition, and health in Ghana

Ahenkan A and Boon E

Table 2. Frequency (%) of consumption* patterns when the product is available in the year
NTFP
Daily
Weekly
Occasionally†
Rarely§
Bushmeat
25
55
18
2
Honey
35
56
10
4
Leaves-food
50
30
15
5
Medicinal plants
31
25
39
5
Mushrooms
55
35
6
4
Snails
45
35
15
5
Fruits
54
20
25
1
*The frequency of consumption refers to consumption patterns when the product is available in
the year; thus, when mushrooms are available (rainy season), 55% of those who eat these do so
every day; †2 weeks and more; §Few times a year; NTFPs=Non-timber forest products
of the sampled population used these remedies to
cure various ailments, including malaria, typhoid,
fever, diarrhoea, arthritis, rheumatism, and snakebite. About two hundred and fifty indigenous trees
and plants with healing properties have been scientifically catalogued in Ghana by Abbiw et al. (3233).

DISCUSSION
Contribution of NTFPs to nutrition, health,
and poverty reduction
NTFPs-related practices are important elements of
livelihood strategies among farmers in the study
area. For the poor households, collection of NTFPs
from the natural forest is a means of coping with
food-supply, nutrition, medicine, and cash shortages. Households living near the forests are typically most dependent on these products and most
active collectors of NTFPs in the study area. This
high dependency on NTFPs, particularly by the
poor-income group, is indicative of their impor-

tance in improvement of livelihoods, nutrition,
and health. Interestingly, this pattern of NTFP-use
and dependency reflects the findings of Falconer in
south Ghana (31) and Anshu Singh et al. (35) in
the Sundarbans. Consumption of NTFPs was not
only high but also very common in the study area.
Not only do NTFPs supplement vitamins, proteins,
minerals, and the nutritional requirements of the
communities, they also diversify their diets and enhance their seasonal food balance.
Unfortunately, the extraction of NTFPs from natural forests has limited potential for improving food
security and nutrition of households. Since most of
these products are picked freely from the forest during the season they blossom, this is obviously unsustainable. Consultations with the stakeholders and
FGDs revealed that most communities in the two
districts were losing access to these valued NTFPs
either because of over-exploitation or destruction
of habitats. Three main strategies have been employed to militate against shortfalls in supply in

Table 3. Pearson’s correlation showing the degree of association between NTFPs and food security, and
nutrition
Contribution to
Contribution to food
Factor
NTFPs
nutrition
security
NTFPs
1
1.000**
0.206*
Pearson’s correlation
Significance (2-tailed)
0.000
0.003
No.
200
200
200
Nutrition
1
0.206*
1.000**
Pearson’s correlation
Significance (2-tailed)
0.000
0.013
No.
200
200
200
Food security
Pearson’s correlation
0.206*
0.206*
1
Significance (2-tailed)
0.013
0.013
No.
200
200
200
*Significant Correlation is at 0.05 level (2-tailed); **Very strong correlation
Volume 29 | Number 2 | April 2011

145

Ahenkan A and Boon E

NTFPs, nutrition, and health in Ghana

most communities in the study area: travel further
to find the products, substituting a particular product with a similar one, or develop a more intensive
or cultivated sources of supply. Ensuring sustainable harvesting of NTFPs is very important for human development in the two districts. This can be
achieved by encouraging and supporting their domestication in Ghana. In recent years, as a result of
the recognition that the extraction of NTFPs from
natural forests has limited potential for improving
household incomes and nutrition, several scholars
have questioned whether the objective of enhancing forest-based livelihoods could not be better
fulfilled by optimizing the production of NTFPs
through domestication. The production of these
products on a permanent basis will enormously
help create more sustainable employment and
income-generation opportunities, enhance food
security, and improve the nutrition and health of
poor farmers and their families. A number of critical
factors also continue to constrain the ability of the
population to exploit the full potential of NTFPs.
These include lack of a clear policy to promote NTFPs, poor processing skills, bushfires, population
growth, and lack of organized markets. An appropriate policy framework for the sustainable promotion of NTFPs is also necessary to help ensure effective development, promotion, and sustainable
harvesting of these products. Processing and preserving NTFPs in Ghana also remain a major problem confronting the agricultural sector in Ghana.
Harvesters of NTFPs are compelled to sell about
80% of their products due to lack of storage and
processing facilities. Most products, such as mushrooms, get spoiled within a few days after harvesting. To enhance the use of NTFPs, it is important
that processing facilities are provided.
Plant medicines have also remained one of the most
affordable and easily-accessible sources of treatment
in primary healthcare in Ghana. The results of the
present study indicate that a significant proportion
of the respondents relied on medicinal plants to
treat various ailments. As in most other remote areas in Ghana, due to the shortage of trained medical
personnel and facilities, modern health services are
not available to most rural areas where the majority
of the population lives. Consequently, most people
employ several coping mechanisms to overcome
their health-related problems, including the use of
NTFPs. These plants are the primary source of free
or affordable healthcare to a significant proportion
of the population in the study area. Unfortunately,
most of these plants have not been documented
146

due to lack of effective research and proper documentation and communication. A good number
of NTFPs and medicinal plants which are used in
nutrition and curing diseases are not documented.
It is important that the traditional uses of plants are
properly documented, and their therapeutic efficacies are effectively disseminated.
There is also a need for increased collaboration
with and within traditional healers and the Centre for Scientific Research into Plant Medicine and
NGOs to document useful plant species that are
being used by traditional healers but are not yet
documented. A vigorous promotion of NTFPs will
constitute a very effective mechanism for popularizing the farming of NTFPs as an instrument for
nutrition, health, and reduction of poverty. Creation of awareness about the nutritional, medicinal
and environmental benefits of NTFPs by the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health, and the
Ministry of Environment will significantly help
promote the farming of NTFPs in Ghana. The potential contribution of NTFPs to nutrition, health,
and reduction of poverty has also to be adequately
promoted.

Conclusions
NTFPs continue to make an important contribution to food security and nutrition and health of
forest-dependent communities in Ghana. They
contribute to improving nutrition either as part of
the family diet or as a means to achieve household
food security. Their potential for improving food
security and sustaining livelihoods is high. The results of the present study revealed that a significant
number of households in Sefwi Wiawso and Bibiani-Bekwai districts derive a significant part of their
food, nutrition, healthcare needs, and income from
NTFPs. These provide essential proteins, vitamins,
minerals, and carbohydrates to the households.
They also contribute to the well-being of rural
households, particularly the poor, in terms of food
security, nutrition, and health. However, a number
of factors, including a policy vacuum, increased
overharvesting, destruction of natural habitats,
bushfires, population growth, and high demand,
are hindering the use and development of NTFPs
in Ghana. An appropriate policy framework for a
sustainable promotion of NTFPs, domestication
of NTFPs, improving harvesting, and processing
techniques are necessary to facilitate food security,
reduction of poverty, and improved livelihoods,
particularly for the economically-marginalized and
forest-dependent communities in Ghana.
JHPN

NTFPs, nutrition, and health in Ghana

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors express their heartfelt gratitude to the
Vlaamse Interuniversesitaire Raad (VLIR) for supporting the PhD program of Albert Ahenkan at
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Belgium. They also
sincerely thank Prof. Kwame Ameyaw Domfeh,
University of Ghana and Prof. Dr. Luc Hens, Human Ecology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium, for reviewing the earlier version of the
paper. Mr. Eric Lartey of the Forest Service Division,
Sefwi Wiawso district and the staff of International
Centre for Enterprise and Sustainable Development
kindly assisted them during data-collection.

REFERENCES
1. Ahenkan A, Boon E. Commercialization of non-timber forest products in Ghana: processing, packaging
and marketing. J Food Agricult Environ 2010;8:962-9.
2. World Health Organisation. Nutrition and health.
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2009. 7 p.
(http://www.emro.who.int/nutrition/index.htm,
accessed on 15 November 2009).
3. Marshall E, Newton A, Schreckenberg K. Commercialization of non-timber Forest products: first steps
in analysing the factors influencing success. Int forest
Rev 2003;2:128-37.
4. Wunder S. Poverty alleviation and tropical forests—
what scope for synergies. World Devt 2001;29:181733.
5. Neumann RP, Hirsch, E. Commercialization of non
timber forest products: review and analysis of research. Bogor: International Centre or Forestry Research, 2000. 147 p.
6. Belcher B, Ruiz Pérez M, Achdiawan R. Global patterns and trends in the use and management of commercial NTFPs: implications for livelihoods and conservation. World Dev 2005:1435-52.
7. Barany M, Hammett, AL, Sene A, Amichev B. Nontimber forest benefits and HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan
Africa. J Forestry 2001;12:36-41.
8. Peters CM. The ecology and management of nontimber forests resources. Washington, DC: World
Bank, 1996. 157 p. (Technical paper no. 322).
9. Agbogidi OM. Ethno-botanical survey of the non-timber forest products in Sapele Local Government Area
of Delta state, Nigeria. Afr J Plant Sci 2010;4:183-9.
10. Arnold JEM.; Ruiz Pérez M. Can non-timber forest
products match tropical forest conservation and development objectives?. Ecol Econs 2001;39:437-47.
11. Food and Agriculture Organization. Wildlife utilisaVolume 29 | Number 2 | April 2011

Ahenkan A and Boon E

tion and food security in Africa. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization, 1997:1-8.
12. World Food Programme. Ending child hunger and
undernutrition initiative. Rome: Global Framework
for Action, World Food Programme, 2007:1-9.
13. Food and Agriculture Organization. Non wood forest
products. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization,
1995:2-12.
14. Shackleton C, Shackleton S. The importance of nontimber forest products in rural livelihood security and
as safety nets: a review of evidence from South Africa.
South Afr J Sci 2004;100:658.
15. World Health Organization. Diet, nutrition, and the
prevention of chronic diseases. Report of WHO Study
Group. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1990:235. (WHO technical report series no. 797).
16. World Health Organization. Priorities for promoting the use of traditional medicines. Geneva: World
Health Organization, 2003. 2 p. (Fact sheet no. 134).
17. Cavendish W. Empirical regularities in the poverty-environment relationship of rural households: evidence from Zimbabwe. World Dev 2000;28:19792003.
18. Bhattarai B, Ojha H, Banjade MR, Luintel H. The effect of NTFP market expansion on sustainable local
livelihoods—a case of Nepal: a discussion note. Forest
Resources Study Action Team. Kathmandu: Forest Action, 2003:1-11.
19. Mahapatra KA, Albers HJ, Elizabeth JZ. Robinson.
The impact of NTFP sales on rural households’ cash
income in India’s dry deciduous forest. Environ Manage 2005; 35:258-65.
20. Van de Poel E, Ahmad Reza H, Caroline JA, Jeanette V,
Niko S. Malnutrition and the disproportional burden
on the poor: the case of Ghana. Int J Equity Health
2007:2-23.
21. Emmanuel BK. Combating poverty in Africa. Encyclopedia of life support systems (EOLSS). Oxford:
EOLSS Publishers, 2005:2-29.
22. Asibey-Berko. Ghana to lose millions of dollars if nutritional disorders are not controlled. Accra: Ghanaweb,
2005. 2 p. (http://www.ghanaweb.com/GhanaHome
Page/NewsArchive/ artikel.php?ID=94947, accessed on 25 July2009).
23. Ghana Health Service. Imagine Ghana free of malnutrition. Accra: Ghana Health Service, Government of
Ghana, 2005:5-13.
24. Ahenkan A, Boon E. Impact of deforestation on medicinal plants in Ghana. GRIN 2008:1-38.
25. Ghana Statistical Services. Report of the fourth Ghana living standards survey. Accra: Ghana Statistical
Services, Government of Ghana, 2000:5-7.
147

NTFPs, nutrition, and health in Ghana

Ahenkan A and Boon E

26. Hay I. Qualitative research methods in human geography. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. 18 p.

bos-Guyana guide. Georgetown: Tropenbos Guyana,
2000. 281 p.

27. Cook KC. Participant observation. In: Flowerden R.
Martin D, editors. Methods in human geography. A
guide for students doing a research project. London:
Sage Publications, 1997. 127 p.

31. Falconer J. Non-timber forest products in southern
Ghana: a summary report. Oxford: University of Oxford, 1994. 235 p. (Series no. 2).

28. Falconer J. Developing research frames for non-timber forest products: experience from Ghana. In: Ruiz
Pérez M, Arnold JEM, editors. Current issues in nontimber forest products research. Hot Springs: Centre
for International Forestry Research, 1997:143-60.
29. Clendon K. The role of forest food resources in village livelihood systems: a study of three villages in
Salavan province. Vientiane: International Union for
Conservation of Nature, 2001:5-15.
30. Van Andel TR. Non-timber forest products of the
North-West district of Guyana. Part II. A field Tropen-

148

32. Abbiw DK. Useful plants of Ghana. London: Intermediate Technology Publications, 1990:119-337.
33. Abbiw D, Gillett H, Agbovie T, Akuetteh B, Amponsah K, Afriyie O. Conservation and sustainable use of
medicinal plants in Ghana. Cambridge: United Nations Environment Programme, 2002:3-32.
34. Food and Agriculture Organization. Trade reforms
and food security: conceptualizing the linkages.
Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization, 2003:29.
35. Anshu S, Prodyut B, Pradeep V, Sarvashish R. Contribution of NTFPs in the livelihood of mangrove forest
dwellers of Sundarban. J Hum Ecol 2010;29:191-200.

JHPN

